ConstellationsEarly View ORIGINAL ARTICLEOpen Access What is democratic backsliding? Fabio Wolkenstein, Corresponding Author Fabio Wolkenstein email protected Department of Political Science, University of Vienna, Austria Correspondence Fabio Wolkenstein, Department of Political Science, University of Vienna, Universitätsstraße 7, 1010 Vienna, Austria. Email email protectedSearch for more papers by this author Fabio Wolkenstein, Corresponding Author Fabio Wolkenstein email protected Department of Political Science, University of Vienna, Austria Correspondence Fabio Wolkenstein, Department of Political Science, University of Vienna, Universitätsstraße 7, 1010 Vienna, Austria. Email email protectedSearch for more papers by this author First published 11 May 2022 httpsdoi.org10.111114678675.12627AboutSectionsPDF ToolsRequest permissionExport citationAdd to favoritesTrack citation ShareShare Give accessShare full text accessShare fulltext accessPlease review our Terms and Conditions of Use and check box below to share fulltext version of article.I have read and accept the Wiley Online Library Terms and Conditions of UseShareable LinkUse the link below to share a fulltext version of this article with your friends and colleagues. Learn more.Copy URL Share a linkShare onFacebookTwitterLinkedInRedditWechat Much recent political commentary suggests that a backlash, revolt, or counterrevolution is unfolding against liberal constitutional democracy e.g., Eatwell Goodwin, 2018 Galston, 2020 Mounk, 2018 Norris Inglehart, 2019 Zielonka, 2018. As a generalizable observation about contemporary politics, this diagnosis is perhaps unduly alarmist e.g., Przeworski, 2019. In some countries, however, sustained attacks on democratic institutions have indeed become commonplace. An emblematic example is the Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbáns attempts to transform his country into an illiberal democracy. Attentive to the weakness of domestic opposition and supranational democracy monitoring, Orbán, and his Fidesz party have gradually dismantled Hungarys post1989 constitutional order. In its place has arisen a regime that is not outright dictatorial, yet less than democraticsomething that may also be said about Turkey under Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Poland after the electoral victory of Jarosław Kaczyńskis PiSparty in 2015. Scholars routinely reach for the analytical frame of democratic backsliding to describe such phenomena. But though the term is widely used across different disciplines, its precise meaning has rarely been made the subject of sustained reflection. As one leading comparative politics scholar notes, the notion of democratic backsliding is frequently used but rarely analyzed Bermeo, 2016, p. 5 Reacting to this, my aim in this article is to clarify the meaning of democratic backsliding. The ambition, in particular, is to develop a more general account of democratic backsliding that can be applied across a range of different institutional contexts. I begin by running through existing attempts to conceptualize democratic backsliding, noting that much of the existing research either under or overdetermines the concept. The second section deals with the fact that the notion of backsliding implies regression, which in turn raises complicated philosophical issues concerning the accurate identification of progressive and regressive social phenomena. The remainder of the paper is devoted to developing a theoretical account of democratic backsliding that neither under nor overdetermines the concept, and that can satisfactorily explain democratic regressions. Taking its cues from work in the tradition of critical theory, the account comes with a broadly framed distinction between rightssuspending and rightsobstructing forms of democratic backsliding. I discuss and illustrate this distinction and offer some reflections on how backsliding may usefully be analyzed using immanent critique. 1 UNDER AND OVERDETERMINATION Most conceptually oriented contributions to the literature on democratic backsliding focus on the techniques and strategies that political actors employ to attack democracy. These include, but are not limited to, coups détat, executive aggrandizement, and the strategic manipulations of elections e.g., Bermeo, 2016 Daly, 2019 Galston, 2020 Haggard Kaufman, 2021 Khaitan, 2019a Levitsky Ziblatt, 2018 Lust Waldner, 2015 Runciman, 2018 Waldner Lust, 2018.1 A further conceptual feature of democratic backsliding that is frequently highlighted is that it occurs through a discontinuous series of incremental actions, not a onetime coup de grâce Waldner Lust, 2018, p. 95. A politys sliding away from democracy is typically a process, not a clean, revolutionary break with the past. If the concrete actions and events that transform democratic regimes into less democratic or outright nondemocratic ones are relatively wellanalyzed, the quite fundamental conceptual question of how exactly we can tell that a democracy has stopped being a democracy is rarely discussed. Most accounts limit themselves to brief, stipulative definitions along the lines of Backsliding makes elections less competitive without entirely undermining the electoral mechanism Waldner Lust, 2018, p. 95 or to cite a quite different definition of democratic backsliding backsliding denotes the stateled debilitation or elimination of any of the political institutions that sustain an existing democracy Bermeo, 2016, p. 5. Why making elections less competitive always and necessarily implies a deterioration of democratic quality, or how a democracys political institutions should look to begin with, is not addressed. Instead, what democracy requires is treated as fairly obvious and straightforward. The fact that there exists a great variety of democratic ideals that could plausibly be invoked, none of which are value neutral or obvious choices, tends to be sidelined for a critical discussion of this practice in political science, see Sabl, 2015. If one part of the literature on democratic backsliding underdetermines the concept by treating certain features of democracy as stable, obvious, and not in need of further discussion, there are numerous more specific case studies of democratic backsliding that offer rich and detailed discussions of what it means to erode a democracy. For example, research on the Hungarian and Polish governments recent attempts at disabling Bánkuti et al., 2012 their countries constitutions avowedly treat a particular conception of liberal democracy with strong independent constitutional courts as definitive normative standard e.g., Bugaric, 2016 Hillion, 2016 Kelemen, 2017 Kochenov, 2014 Müller, 2015 Scheppele, 2019 Wolkenstein, 2022. As JanWerner Müller 2015, p. 152 notes, this form of constrained democracy was the preferred conception of the architects of the postwar West European order and underpins the democratic constitution of the European Union. It is interpreted to be implied in Article 2 TEU, which Hungary and Poland are said to be breaching with their illiberal attacks on constitutional courts in particular CastilloOrtiz, 2019. In short, democratic backsliding in Hungary and Poland equals sliding away from the constrained conception of democracy that defines the Unions wider constitutional selfunderstanding. Unfortunately, such a contextspecific understanding of democracy is only of limited use for the task of clarifying the meaning of democratic backsliding. For even if it makes some sense to say that attacks on independent constitutional courts are a core conceptual feature of democratic backsliding within the EU, given the conception of democracy the EU is based on, it would be odd to say that attacks on independent constitutional courts are a core conceptual feature of democratic backsliding as such, that is, in any given context. Democracies come in many different forms with significant variations in their institutional architecture, and some supposedly wellfunctioning democracies have no or very weak constitutional courts e.g., the Scandinavian countries see Larsen, 2021 Wind, 2010.2 Arguably a useful general account of democratic backsliding must be able to explain deteriorations of democracy in such nonconstrained democracies, too. The same problem of overdetermination plagues recent attempts to measure democratic backsliding using a largescale quality of democracy datasets, such as the Varieties of Democracy Project VDem. Without denying the value of this impressive project, its modelbased definition of democracy as electoral democracy plus three additional components the rule of law ensuring respect for civil liberties, judicial constraints on the executive branch, and legislative checks and oversight of the executive Mechkova et al., 2017, p. 162, which is merely stipulated rather than defended, also runs the risk of overgeneralizing the place and function of particular idealtypical democracysustaining institutions this is a consequence of thinking about democracy in terms of particular models of democracy, see Warren, 2017 on this issue in connection with VDem in particular, see Dryzek, 2016, p. 362. For instance, the quite central assumption that more judicial checks on legislative processes indicate better democracy appears rash, not least because there exist wellfunctioning democracies with very few judicial checks, as noted before. Identifying democracy with very specific institutional features not only blinds us to the considerable institutional variations across democracies. Perhaps even more importantly, it also holds the risk of making use lose track of what political institutions should actually achieve within a democratic political system. As Warren 2017, pp. 4041 argues, once we step back and ask that question, it often turns out that the institutions or practices that particular models of democracy foreground as definitive of democracy as such, have clear strengths and limitations. If we treat their mere existence and stability across time as a primary normative yardstick, we may well miss the bigger, qualitative picture of whether those institutions perform their supposed functions in a satisfying fashion.3 That is, we may grow insensitive to the question of whether they fulfill the function ascribed to them in a way that sustains or enhances democracy at the level of the democratic system. 2 HISTORY, PROGRESS, TELEOLOGY There are two primary takeaways from the prior section. First, a theoretically satisfying account of democratic backsliding must be able to explain why particular developments e.g., making elections less competitive without entirely undermining the electoral mechanism constitute a degeneration of democracy. Second, a theoretically satisfying account of democratic backsliding must be able to explain this without asserting a particular normative model of democracy that frames specific institutional features of democracy as definitive components of any wellfunctioning democracy. Another issue that needs handling concerns the question of whether we need to make specific theoretical assumptions about history in general and the historical development of democracy in particular when we speak of democratic backsliding. To better understand what is at stake, consider first that the notion of backsliding implies directionality moving backward, from a desirable, higher state of development to a prior, lower state. This meaning has been inscribed into the term since its first usage in the English language. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the verb to backslide was first used in a published work in 1581, in the context of the sixteenth century religious dispute between the English Latinist Walter Haddon and the Portuguese bishop Jerome Osorio de Fonseca. The specific phrase in which it was usedi.e., the onely righteousnesse of Fayth, from whence they were backslyden is indicative of the justmentioned connotation of moving back to a lower, earlier state of moral development. The adjective backsliding, in turn, makes its first appearance in the King James Bible of 1611 and then more than 200 years later, in Sir Walter Scotts 1816 novel The Tale of Old Mortality, where Scott speaks of a backsliding pastor, that has forsaken the strict path. Again, backsliding is invoked to describe a regress into an earlier state of amorality or sin. This normative connotation is to some extent retained in the term democratic backsliding. Bermeo 2016, p. 6 acknowledges this when she notes that When linked with the word democratic, the terms current secular meaning is in keeping with its origins in that it denotes a willful turning away from an ideal. However, there is an important difference between the early modern, religious use of backsliding or to backslide and the contemporary secular notion of democratic backsliding. Whereas the former is based on a specifically Christian ideal of striving toward spiritual maturity and perfection according to which No one is perfect who does not strive for further perfection Koselleck, 2010, p. 172, the latter at least implicitly turns upon the kinds of Enlightenment philosophies that see history as gravitating towards evergreater emancipation see, paradigmatically, Hegel, 1986.4 The assumption appears to be that the theory and practice of democracy have over the course of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries progressively evolved to become more inclusive and democratic, culminating in as one wellknown commentator put it the universalization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government Fukuyama, 1989, p. 4. Accordingly, any departure from this final type of regime e.g., making it more illiberal, as Viktor Orbán and his party tried to do equals regresssliding backward. There are at least two wellknown problems with such developmental views of history. For one thing, many of their most common variations adopt an implausibly teleological vision of progress that casts history as moving unidirectionally toward a predetermined goal. As Buchanan and Powell 2018, p. 7 put it, however, acknowledging the bloodbaths of the twentieth and early twentyfirst century requires abandoning linear conceptions of progress that imply continuous progress or at least rule out major regressions. Theodor W. Adorno 2006, p. 4 famously drew an even stronger conclusion After Auschwitz, he argued, any appeal to the idea of progress would seem absurd given the scale of the catastrophe. For another thing, developmental views of history typically have a strong Eurocentric or Westerncentric bent. That is, they tend to present a historical story that positions European modernity as the outcome of a developmental learning process, and this story necessarily positions non or premodern Others as cognitively and normatively inferior to us Allen, 2016, p. 79.