However, there are some exceptions. For example, serious scientific misconduct is a reason for dismissal from service under the civil service law of Lower Saxony in Germany, meaning that extraordinary termination of employment with the Max Planck Society might be justified after an instance of misconduct MPG, 2000. In the absence of appropriate legislation, internal regulations might offer consensual solutions through conciliation or arbitration, as contemplated by the DFG. Between 1990 and 2005, the number of international collaborations, measured by coauthorship of refereed papers, grew linearly, but the number of international addresses grew exponentially. This partly reflects collaborations between researchers from countries where procedures for overseeing ethics and investigating misconduct are embryonic or simply lacking. The rise in multiple authorships reflects the multidisciplinary, collaborative character of modern research Mishkin, 1998. Yet, a lack of homogeneity in monitoring research means that when misconduct allegations appear, authors from different countries are being treated differently. One way to ensure that all coauthors are treated fairly would be to establish a common European policy on scientific dishonesty with uniform procedures for violations Riis, 2001 Mishkin, 1998. International cooperation in Europeand between Europe and the USAmight also tackle the problem that arises when scientists relocateafter having committed misconductto countries where employers might be unaware of their previous record. Technological advances, especially the burgeoning impact of the internet on scientific discourse and comment, mean that the selfinterest of countries demands a common pathway for addressing allegations of scientific misconduct and ensuring transparent research outcomes. One way to ensure that all coauthors are treated fairly would be to establish a common European policy on scientific dishonesty with uniform procedures for violations Although heterogeneous in nature, influential national and European academic societies and associations might work out principles of good scientific practice for their area of expertise and make them binding on their members. In addition, PanEuropean research funding bodiesnotably the EC and the European Research Council ERCmight set up regulatory mechanisms and compel institutions to create and enforce research integrity rules and procedures for handling allegations of scientific misconduct. The EC and the ESF are well suited to create a panel of scientists who could act as independent experts in inquiries and investigations of misconduct related to projects financed by the EC framework research programmes and the ERC. These bodies might also take the lead in describing standards and goals. The appropriate granting of jurisdiction is also an essential requirement to make the system work by recognizing a research agencys right to enforce its actions. The EC might also determine whether any agreedupon definition of misconduct should be broadly or narrowly based. As a first step, the EC might ask its advisory European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to draw up an opinion paper with recommendations. The appropriate granting of jurisdiction is also an essential requirement to make the system work by recognizing a research agencys right to enforce its actions The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OECD Paris, France is currently studying how to encourage good research standards and how to ensure commitment from all parties to investigate misconduct and cooperate in investigations. Inevitably, change will require European countries to adopt OECD guidance or something similar. However, it is doubtful that harmonized standards alone will have much impact. The lessons learned by the US Food and Drug Administration when they brought together Europe, Japan and the USA along with the pharmaceutical industry to set international standards for approving new drug applications might be a useful starting point to study successful efforts to harmonize regulations. Forging universal standards will be a longterm commitment that requires resources and participation from organizations such as the OECD, ESF and ORI to strengthen international collaborations and research integrity. Some of these issues will be discussed during the Second World Conference on Research Integrity, to be held in Singapore in July 2010. It would also be useful to advance towards an agreedupon definition of scientific misconduct, which is urgently needed to unify authority across various countries in order for progress to be made. Punishment makes no sense without prevention, and prevention of research misconduct is necessary because selfregulation is unlikely to be effective Bosch, 2008. With an overall budget of more than 51 billion, European authorities should not miss the opportunity to protect the Seventh Framework Research Programto run from 2007 to 2013and the ERC against this type of scientific crime. Conflict of Interest The author declares that he has no conflict of interest.