In partial defence, the ICs extensive interpretation and even law making is arguably foreseen by states when they choose the treaty format. Changes to treaties usually require unanimity,85 though states could instead agree to allow some changes by qualified majority voting,86 or establish a separate treaty body for interpretation. And the IC is often authorized to follow rules of treaty interpretation agreed by the states, including such guides as the object and purpose of the treaty.87 States are also often unable and unwilling to specify treaties fully, instead agreeing to deliberately incomplete contracts88 to reduce their own decisionmaking costs. They leave it to the IC to clarify the existing provisions,89 expecting indeed that decisions through the conventions mechanism will create a significant new body of international law.90 The independence of ICs may arguably reduce the impact of differential state power in this lawmaking process.91 Both when adjudicating disputes and when developing the treaty, the IC must heed the principle of audi alteram partemto hear the strongest arguments on behalf of all parties. This concern supports broad representation on the international bench of different legal systems and geographical regionsand arguably of genders and other relevant segments of the affected populations.92 Such representation may also show that the IC treats the parties to the dispute as equals.93 ICs secure such local knowledge while maintaining impartiality in different ways. The ECtHR always includes the judge nominated by the accused state on the bench, while the InterAmerican Court of Human Rights excludes such judges. Strong professional commitments to ruleoflaw standards reduce the risk of domination and give evidence that the judges exercise their discretion appropriately. Combined with transparent reasoning and dissenting opinions, such standards also enhance the precedential effects of judgments and interpretations. These features arguably contribute to the ICs role in preventing future disputes and fostering stable expectations and planning.94 Ensuring the desired independence, impartiality, accountability, and legality to requisite extents poses institutional design challenges. Dunoff and Pollack identify an unavoidable trilemma among judicial independence, judicial accountability, and judicial transparency, it is possible to maximize, at most, any two, but not all three, of these values.95 They illustrate the tradeoffs with three near ideal types the CJEU, the ECtHR, and the ICJ, which, respectively, give less priority to transparency, accountability, and independence. The present account might reduce the significance of this trilemma by considering the extent and kinds of independence, accountability and immunities required for international judges to accomplish their core task of issuing impartial judgments based on legal method.96 Consider, finally, the effects of an IC. Insofar as it helps states secure objectives otherwise out of reach, this may ground the ICs claims to give states and other deference constituencies new contentindependent, exclusionary reasons to act. To show how this account helps assess criticisms of the effects of ICs, we may distinguish between 1 the ICs output its judgments and interpretations 2 its outcome in the sense of states compliance with particular judgments and 3 the ultimate broader impact of such compliance on the ground.97 Consider claims that the ECtHRs legitimacy suffers from its immense backlog of approximately 60,000 cases.98 The ECtHR fails to adjudicate alleged human rights violations, and hence to prevent future violations. This account reframes and redirects much of this criticism towards states which, after all, control the ECtHR budget. The ECtHR arguably performs its task to enable states to fulfil their human rights obligations, though certain states routinely fail to comply.99 The ECtHR annual reports now names the four states which cause two thirds of the backlog, possibly to deflect legitimacy criticisms. Inversely, does the low number of substantive cases for ITLOS challenge its legitimacy?100 States may not find its offer of dispute adjudication a helpful addition to existing alternatives. This paucity in the core task of ITLOS may obstruct its broader range of tasks involved in specifying the treaty further and stabilizing expectations.101 However, it may still help states avoid disputes if they resolve them in its shadow, in light of expected judgments. The lack of cases is often a challenge for new ICs, which may actively seek to expand their jurisdiction,102 or market themselves as better than alternative dispute mechanisms.103 If the EU succeeds in establishing a new multilateral court for the settlement of investment disputes, it may also have to engage in such legitimation strategies, consistent with judicial standards of impartiality and independence.104 How does states deference to an ICs judgments and interpretations affect its legitimate authority? Solutions to some collective action problems may require almost no free riders.