Within the European Union, the response to the COVID19 pandemic has a striking diversity in its approach. By focusing on Belgium, France, Germany, and Italycountries that represent different models of administrative systems in Europethe analysis shows that major similarities and convergences have become apparent from a crosscountry perspective. Moreover, coping with the crisis has been first and foremost an issue of the national states, whereas the European voice has been weak. Hence, the countries immediate responses appear to be coronanationalistic, which we label coronationalism. This essay shows the extent to which the four countries adopted different crisis management strategies and which factors explain this variance, with a special focus on their institutional settings and administrative systems. During the last two decades, the globalized world has been exposed to a series of pandemics SARSCoV in 200203, global influenza in 200405, swine flu in 200910, and global influenza again in 201718 and 201920. In light of these events, national governments around the world, including those in the European Union EU, have often had opportunities to prepare for health crises, their management, and the development of governance mechanisms to deal with them. The COVID19 crisis has shown that European countries remain poorly prepared for dealing and coping with health crises and for responding in a coordinated way to a severe influenza pandemic or to any similar global, sustained, and threatening public health emergency WHO 2019, 23. Even if many countries risk analyses and pandemic plans were available and the specialized agency of the EUthe European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ECDCperiodically stressed the importance of planning, these plans have rarely been exercised in preparation for expected events. As a consequence, the knowledge gained from previous pandemics and risk scenarios has been barely, if at all, used and shared by decision makers. Most striking from an EU perspective, coping with the crisis was first and foremost an issue of the national states, whereas the collective European voice was rather weak, if not sometimes entirely absent. Hence, the countries immediate responses appear to be coronanationalistic, which we label coronationalism. Public administration has several theories and models that try to capture different realities of governments handling major crises or failures in general, such as crisis management Boin et al. 2016 Boin and Lodge 2016 Christensen et al. 2016, policy failures Peters 2015, and blame avoidance Hood 2010 Mortensen 2013. There are also several theories and models about dramatic changes in realities, such as change management Fernandez and Rainey 2006 with burning platforms Skinner 2016, disruptive and sustainable innovations Osborne and Brown 2005, or transformation governance Grin, Rotmans, and Schot 2010. This contribution compares the struggles of national governments in the first four months of 2020 to develop, establish, and use mechanisms for crisis governance as a response to cope with the COVID19 pandemic within the diverse scenery of the EU. The focus of this article is thus on what the national crisis response mechanisms in the coronavirus crisis look like and which factors influence their design and use. However, at this early stage, we do not discuss the implications of the measures taken on the basis of these crisis management mechanisms. The analysis focuses on Belgium, France, Germany, and Italy, countries that represent different models of administrative systems in Europe see Kuhlmann and Wollmann 2019. Whereas France and Italy stand for the Continental European Napoleonic model with a traditionally highly centralized administrative setting although with recent tendencies toward decentralization, Germany is a federal state with strong Länder state governments. Belgium has moved from a centralized Napoleonic country to a federal state in which subnationallevel governments, called regions, enjoy significant powers. We assume that these differences in administrative settings play a role when it comes to explaining specific modes of crisis management regarding 1 monitoring, 2 learning, 3 decisionmaking, 4 coordinating, 5 communicating, 6 leading, and 7 recovering capacity. Two main points result from our comparison To fight global crises, national responses are necessary but not sufficient. To the extent that national responses are different and divergent, more coordination is required. These differences and divergences can be explained mainly by institutional variance. This essay shows the extent to which the four countries adopted different crisis management strategies and the factors that explain this variance, with a special focus on institutional settings and administrative systems. Drawing on this crosscountry comparative perspective, we show that managing the COVID19 crisis in Europe has been predominantly shaped by distinct countryspecific approaches instead of convergent Europeanized action. Monitoring When and How to Start Defining and Solving Which Problem? The scope of the problem hit many countries by surprise, as almost nobody expected Europe to be the next epicenter of the virus outbreak, after China. The EU agency that was established to avoid and contain such a crisis, the Stockholmbased ECDC, failed to alert its EU member states. Within the EU, Italy became the first hot spot, with a second wave hitting France, Spain, and Austria and a third wave in Belgium, the Netherlands, and Germany. Central and Eastern European countries showed fewer registered cases. Highly affected nonEU countries included the United Kingdom, Norway, and Switzerland. In general, the dynamics differed and the reasons for different impacts also varied from country to country. Early warning detection systems are crucial for speedy and effective responses. This needs to be combined with reliable and comparable monitoring systems and mechanisms to translate and interpret data into information, which is made available and useful for risk analysis and decisionmaking and for feeding adjusted policy measures and service delivery. The different attention paid by countries to the updating of their pandemic preparedness plans see table 1 has probably been reflected in different attitudes toward and awareness of the threat. The different governance structures for epidemiological risk analyses and pandemic plans were also influential. Table 1. Regulatory Design for Management of Health Crises Pandemics Belgium France Germany Italy Epidemiological risk analyses pandemic plans Federal government Sciensano Scientific Institute of Public Health federal government agency National Ministry of Solidarity and Health Ministère des Solidarités et de la Santé with General Direction of Health Direction générale de la santé, DGS and CORRUSS Centre opérationnel de régulation et de réponse aux urgences sanitaires et sociales Federal Ministry of Health RobertKochInstitute National Pandemic Plan Länder and local pandemic plans Ministry of Health National Institute for Health Regional Health Care Systems Last influenza pandemic preparedness plan 2009 2011 2016 2010 Formal risk management procedures and structures No specific procedures for healthrelated crises except for general emergency procedures and structures Activation of standard operating procedures, including CORRUSS 1 and National Defense and Security Committee, beginning of January No centralized procedures available establishment of nationalregionallocal task forces amendment of the federal infection protection law to declare an epidemic emergency of national concern March 25, 2020 Activation of Civil Protection Operational Committee, end of January Source Authors compilation of information based on online references on the country cases at the end of the article. In all countries, the most important initiatives were taken only when the number of reported casesand deathsbegan to increase, and public awareness grew accordingly. During this delay, the national institutions began to prepare, although there was no common practice of testing that allowed the identification of the exact number of contaminations. Notwithstanding these similarities, there are also important differences to be observed among the four countries with respect to the activation of formal risk management procedures. Although they all declared a pandemic emergency of national concern, this was the case at an early stage in France and Italy January INSEE, Ministère des Solidarités et de Santé and Santé Publique France 2020, 2. In Belgium, the COVID19 outbreak was officially called a pandemic in early February. In Germany, because of initially lacking legal provisions in this regard, the declaration was only made by the federal parliament by end of March when the peak of the crisis was already over. In France and Italy, centralized risk management procedures and structures were activated only after numbers became visible, whereas in Germany, no such centralized structures were available and the establishment of crisis task forces had to go from the bottom up table 1. In Belgium, a threestep containment plan was introduced before the first contamination reached the country, but it largely failed as it was very quickly overtaken by the numbers. Monitoring systems have been set up and evolved very differently, depending on the policy and intensity of testing, organizational coverage hospitals, centers of care, private homes, the geographic perimeter regional versus national, and the procedures for data collection centralized versus decentralized. Overall, coordination of monitoring systems at the EU level was clearly lacking. From this comparative observation, we can conclude that the multilevel administrative setting in the four countries has had an important influence on the activation and functioning of risk management procedures. Learning from Whom? How to Put Effective Practices and Operations in Place Since the first cases emerged, European countries have learned from past crises by implementing crisis management systems and processes that have been adopted from other countries, but also by adapting these systems and processes for each local context. Almost all European countries have gone through a number of health and other crises and developed readiness plans. In Germany, there is a history of managing floods 2003 and influenza 2009 and 201718, and operational emergency plans and risk analyses have been available since 2013 for pandemics and floods. However, in reality, these plans were not practiced and were not linked to risk management. In France, during periods of major crises, such as the terror attacks in 2015 Charlie Hebdo or sanitary crises such as several heat waves in 2003, 2006, and 2019, the central government takes over and starts running the system. In Italy, the Civil Protection Department has a long history of crisis intervention in earthquakes 1976 in Friuli, 1980 in Irpinia, 1997 in Umbria, 2009 in LAquila, 2012 in Emilia Romagna, and 2016 in Lazio and floods 1994 in Piemonte, 1998 in Campania, 2000 in Piemonte, but not in health crises. In Belgium, the dioxine crisis 1999, influenza crises 2007, 200910, and a terrorist attack March 2016 positioned action and response plans. All these experiences have resulted in different approaches to disaster management table 2. For instance, the Italian Civil Protection Department consolidated experiences in crisis management, but at the same time, it has never directly managed a big pandemic. Neither have the corresponding actors in other European countries. Table 2. Institutional Design for Governing Health Crises in Four European Countries Belgium France Germany Italy Legalinstitutional foundation of sanitary and public health policies and their implementation Legislation on sanitary and public health issues Federal legislation for hospitals regional legislation for homes for care elderly, disabled etc. National code of public health white plan plan blanc plan Federal Infection Protection Law IfSG Länder legislation on regional hospitals and public health institutions National legislation on essential levels of assistance and financial resources reallocation regional policy making and legislation Execution of sanitary and public health issues hospital management Federal Public Service ministry for Health, Food Chain Safety, and Environment regional ministries and agencies Regional Health Agencies Agences regionals de santé, ARS managements of public state regional, local universities hospitals and private clinics Länder and local execution of federal IfSG Länderlevel hospital plansfinancing Länder and local management of hospitals Regional government, local health authorities, and local private hospitals steered by regional government National Institutes for Healthcare Risk and disaster management pandemic mitigationcontainment measures Disaster management Federal minister for interior national disaster plans civil protection provincial governors provincial disaster plans local government mayors local disaster plans Ministry of the Interior National crisis center for civil protection in peace times in coronavirus times, prime minister and ministerial cabinet national restricted defense and security council headed by the state president Länder competency for civil protection in peace times local management of disasters in coronavirus crisis, predominantly local health authorities National Civil Protection Agencyindependent organization inside the presidency of Ministers Council Declaration of pandemic emergency of national concern federal competency nationalfederal coordination when two or more provinces are involved, or provincial competence is insufficient Amendment of sanitary code by new part on sanitary emergency sanitary emergency can be declared by the ministerial cabinet for two months and can be prolonged with approval of parliament So far no legal provision newly introduced during the Corona crisis by the Federal government with parliamentary approval Ministers Council resolution adopted according to the existing legislation without Parliamentary approval January 31, first two cases of Chinese tourist in Rome. Activation of Civil Protection Operational Committee Shutdownslockdownscontact banscanceling of events National Security Council federal PM, and relevant ministers, regional PMs, top civil servants National Crisis Centre NCCN First half of March first voluntary As of March 17 President announces shutdown of nurseries and schools As of March 23 President declares sanitary emergency general lockdown Initially, separate statutory orders by 16 Länder later coordinated federalLänderagreements implementation of Länder orders by citiescounties National government decision, initially limited to some red zone February 21, then extended to the country March 9 Controlling of measures and punishment for noncompliance Federal and local police Local policy supported by national gendarmerie Länder police local authorities for public order and safety National police, armies, local police General mode of crisis management Centralized negotiated with regions decentralized implementation regions and local government Centralized very strong position of central statecentral level Decentralizedcoordinated weak position of the federal level Centralizedtopdown with ad hoc coordination mechanisms Civil Protection Department Network strong Regional involvement Source Authors compilation of information based on online references on the country cases at the end of the article. Even if this was a helpful starting position, the rapid global spread of this type of crisis, the lack of practice, the missing link to risk management, and the need to mobilize specific capacity made this learning necessary but not sufficient.