doi 10.3389fmicb.2024.1455462. eCollection 2024. Characterizing neuroinvasion and neuropathology of SARSCoV2 by using AC70 human ACE2 transgenic mice. Hsu JC1, SaenkhamHuntsinger P2, Huang P2, Octaviani CP2, Drelich AK2, Peng BH3, Tseng CK124. Author information 1Department of Biochemistry, Cell Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, United States. 2Department of Microbiology Immunology, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, United States. 3Department of Neuroscience, Cell Biology, Anatomy, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, United States. 4Department of Pathology, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, United States. COVID19 presents with a plethora of neurological signs and symptoms despite being characterized as a respiratory disease, including seizures, anxiety, depression, amnesia, attention deficits, and alterations in consciousness. The olfactory nerve is widely accepted as the neuroinvasive route by which the etiological agent SARSCoV2 enters the brain, but the trigeminal nerve is an oftenoverlooked additional route. Based on this consensus, we initially conducted a pilot experiment investigating the olfactory nerve route of SARSCoV2 neuroinvasion via intranasal inoculation in AC70 human ACE2 transgenic mice. Notably, we found that the trigeminal ganglion is an early and highly efficient site of viral replication, which then rapidly spread widely throughout the brain where neurons were primarily targeted. Despite the extensive viral infection across the brain, obvious evidence of tissue pathology including inflammatory infiltration, glial activation, and apoptotic cell deaths were not consistently observed, albeit inflammatory cytokines were significantly induced. However, the expression levels of different genes related to neuronal function, including the neurotransmitter dopamine pathway as well as synaptic function, and markers of neuronal damage were altered as compared to mockinfected mice. Our findings suggest that the trigeminal nerve may serve as a neuroinvasive route complementary to the olfactory nerve and that the ensuing neuroinvasion presented a unique neuropathological profile. This study provides insights into potential neuropathogenic mechanisms utilized by coronaviruses. Copyright 2024 Hsu, SaenkhamHuntsinger, Huang, Octaviani, Drelich, Peng and Tseng. DOI 10.3389fmicb.2024.1455462 PMCID PMC11458418 PMID 39380676 Conflict of interest statement The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.