Working Paper No. 234. Washington, DC Center for Global Development. Google Scholar, Pritchett and de Weijer 2010 Pritchett, L. and de Weijer,, F. Fragile states stuck in a capability trap?. Background paper for the World Development Report 2011. Google Scholar, and the broader discussion in World Bank 2011 World Bank. 2011. World Development Report 2011 Conflict, Security and Development, Washington, DC World Bank. Crossref , Google Scholar. 2. There is a fundamental distinction between development as the improved wellbeing of the individuals in a given society and development as a process affecting societies andor nationstates. Debates abound about the appropriate normative criteria to be used in evaluating the wellbeing of individuals for example, the role of individual income versus other sources of wellbeing or philosophical debates about individual utility versus broader metrics, and hence how one should assess the wellbeing of the citizensresidents of a given region. But this is ontologically distinct from the notion of development in which the entity experiencing the development is not an individual but instead a society. Normatively, one may wish to only privilege one perhaps human development and evaluate social development only as an input to expanded human development, but they are nevertheless conceptually different uses of the term development. 3. The classic definition here is that of Simon Kuznets 1966 Kuznets, S. 1966. Modern Economic Growth Rate, Structure and Spread, New Haven, CT Yale University Press. Google Scholar, who argued that modern economic growth was a product of enhanced productivity as opposed to, say, rents from natural resource extraction. Thus even though Slovenia and Saudi Arabia have roughly comparable levels of per capita wealth, in the former it is a product of modern economic growth development whereas in the latter it is merely a result of exporting oil. 4. Note that this may or may not manifest itself in a democracy. For our purposes, modern polities are polities that reflect the aggregate preferences of the population whatever those preferences happen to be. 5. That is, rights and opportunities are incrementally afforded to people irrespective of their race, health status, ethnicity, gender, religion or other socialdemographic category. Thus Saudi Arabia and Indonesia, both predominantly Islamic counties, differ with respect to how modern their views are regarding the status of women.