Abstract The article focuses on five essential phenomena in the Finnish memory culture relating to the three Finnish wars fought in 19391945, namely, 1 the memory of the fallen 2 the influential work by author Väinö Linna 3 the contested memory politics and veteran cultures in the 1960s and 1970s 4 Germany and the Holocaust in the Finnish memory culture and 5 the neopatriotic turn in the commemoration of the wars from the end of the 1980s onwards. The Finnish memory culture of 19391945 presents an interesting case of how the de facto lost wars against the Soviet Union have been shaped into cornerstones of national history and identity that continue to play a significant role even today. Using the growing research literature on the various aspects of the Finnish war memories and memory politics, the article aims, first, at outlining a synthesis of the memory cultures central features and, second, at challenging the common contemporary conception, according to which the Finnish war veterans would have been forgotten, neglected and even disgraced during the postwar decades, to be rehabilitated only from the end of the 1980s onwards. Keywords Second World WarFinlandmemorycommemorationwar veteranswar memorialswar fictionthe HolocaustFinlandization Acknowledgements The article is based on a presentation at the colloquium Erfahrungen der Ostfront in Erinnerung und Verarbeitung vom Kalten Krieg bis zum postkommunistischen Europa Fallstudien at the Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies, Germany, in October 2009. An earlier version of the article has been published in Spanish Ville Kivimäki, Entre la victoria y la derrota La memoria de la II Guerra Mundial en Finlandia, Historia Social 71 2011 4158. I would like to thank Professor Gustavo Corni and Professor Xosé Manoel Núñez Seixas for their comments and helpfulness. Notes 1 For a general overview on the Finnish memory cultures of war in German, see Kinnunen, Finnische Kriegserinnerung also Rautkallio, Politik und Volk. Parallel and interlinked with the finishing of this article a concise English presentation on the Finnish memory culture of war has been written by Tiina Kinnunen and Markku Jokisipilä, Shifting Images of Our Wars. 2 Stenius, Österberg, and Östling, Nordic Narratives. 3 See Jokisipilä, Finnish History Culture Meinander, A Separate Story? and Kivimäki, Three Wars and Their Epitaphs. 4 During the Continuation War, Finland occupied large areas of Soviet Eastern Karelia. Whereas the Winter War and the Continuation War were fullscale conflicts, the Lapland War against Germany was largely fought with reduced conscript units after the army was demobilized in November 1944. For concise English overviews on the political and military history of Finland in 19391945, see Vehviläinen, Finland in the Second World War Kinnunen and Kivimäki, Finland in World War II. 5 For the distribution of casualties of 1918 in English, see War Victims in Finland, 191422. 6 Here and hereafter, for the general political history of Finland in English, please consult Jussila, Hentilä, and Nevakivi, From Grand Duchy Kirby, Concise History of Finland. 7 The most important peace terms of 1944 included the Soviet annexation of some 10 of the Finnish territory, war reparations worth US300 million, the obligation to drive out the German troops in Northern Finland and the renting of a military base to the Soviet Union in the immediate vicinity of Helsinki.