The only existing model that estimates the risk of unfavorable future quality of life shows important differences from risk models for death, particularly the relative importance of current measures of quality of life.32 More astute anticipation of an unfavorable quality of life until death, in addition to anticipation of death, would better identify patients for whom detailed discussions of prognosis and options are appropriate. In choosing among options, this information gap regarding nonmortality patientcentered outcomes is exacerbated by the lack of rigor in collecting health status information in major trials, although this is improving. Even less is known about the relative impact of the disease and therapies on caregiver burden and quality of life for family members.4346Download figureDownload PowerPointFigure 2. Prognosis is not only about expectations for survival. There are multiple domains that are of varying importance to individual patients. Adapted from Spilker.38Uncertainty for the IndividualEven under these idealized circumstances, most models designed to predict mortality have only modest accuracy.47 Further complicating practical use, prediction models represent the average survival for a population of patients with characteristics similar to those of the individual patient. A 70 chance of 2year survival does not directly translate to an individual who will instead be 100 alive or dead at any point in time. For patients with advanced disease, interest often focuses instead on the expected length of time remaining patients ask the question, How long do I have? This point prediction of survival time48 is even more difficult to estimate.49,50 Even if a model fits well for a cohort and the estimated survival curve provides a good fit to the data, it is not clear where along the curve an individual patient will lie. As an example of the difficulty in estimating survival duration, one can consider the median survival estimate 50 survival at time x as an estimation of the time in which half of the patients will live longer and half will live for a shorter time. Parkes51 defines an error in survival as an estimate more than twice as long as the actual survival or less than half the actual survival. That is, if a patient survived for 12 months, a predicted survival of 2 years or 6 months would be considered an error by this definition. This error depends on the variability in survival times for patients, more specifically on the standard deviation of the logarithm of survival time. Using several statistical models of survival, the probability of greater than 2fold error remains near 50 under realistic assumptions.49Ultimately, the stochastic nature of heart failure conveys a high level of prognostic uncertainty for most patients. Future events have a certain degree of unpredictability, such that improved understanding of risk tends to add incrementally less prognostic information to existing models. Even a perfect model that includes all possible measurements describes only what has already happened. The trajectory can often be steepened by new conditions or life events, such as myocardial infarction, a serious fall, or the death of a spouse. It is vital to acknowledge uncertainty in discussions about future care.Need for Accurate Estimates of RiskDespite limitations of prognostic models, they are generally more accurate than clinical intuition, which is prone to bias. A review of survival predictions among terminally ill cancer patients52 found that physicians consistently overestimated survival, which has been seen in other studies.51,53 For patients discharged from the hospital with advancedstage heart failure, both physicians and nurses survival estimates had modest ability to discriminate those who subsequently died from those who lived with nurses outperforming physicians, but absolute estimates were significantly miscalibrated, again overestimating survival.54 In patients with chronic heart failure, the patientpredicted survival also tended to overestimate survival versus modelbased predictions, particularly for younger patients.55 Clinicians need to learn how to leverage objective risk models, while recognizing their limitations and adapting them on the basis of their unique clinical and psychosocial features and serial assessments not generally incorporated into such models.Anticipation, Timing, and ReviewAn annual heart failure review with patients should include discussion of current and potential therapies for both anticipated and unanticipated events.On the day of hospital admission, it is far better to review rather than introduce advanced care decisions, which requires that patient preferences have been discussed previously and documented in the ambulatory setting.Clinical milestones such as implantable cardioverterdefibrillator ICD shocks or recurrent hospitalization should trigger interim review and discussion of treatment options and preferences.Timing of DiscussionsFinding appropriate time to discuss preferences, prognosis, and medical options is a formidable challenge. Such discussions require a major commitment of time, focus, and emotional energy, which is not in synchrony with the frenetic pace and frequent interruptions of clinical practice. Current organizational and reimbursement structures provide strong disincentive to such intense encounters.As a result, formal discussions about prognosis and decision making are often deferred until more emergent and less favorable occasions, when thoughtful decision making may be impaired. For instance, at the time of presentation for hospital admission with decompensated heart failure, patients are frequently uncomfortable and often require urgent, intensive evaluation and management. Clinicians responsible for delivering care in this setting are typically unfamiliar with the patient and overall disease trajectory. Hasty questions such as, Do you want us to do everything?