Independence is by definition relational it is the independence from or the dependence on something or somebody. Thus, metaphorically speaking, its assessment cannot be limited to a microscopic study of one slice of a salami, without having regard to the rest of the salami stick The European Union EU is a project of integration through law. President Lenaerts presents this official position well Integration through the rule of law defines what the European Union today stands for Lenaerts, 2020, p. 29. As a core value and a fundamental principle the Rule of Law has a special status in EU law, advancing a clear idea of constitutionalism taming nationalism by diffusing the model of liberal democracy to countries with an authoritarian past Bárd, 2022 Pech, 2009. This idea is codified by the Member States in Article 2 TEU 1 and informs the functioning of the whole system of EU law Klamert and Kochenov, 2019 von Danwitz, 2018. Despite these clear legal obligations, the Rule of Law and other closely intertwined values are severely and systematically violated in several EU Member States Sadurski, 2019 Sajó, 2021. The World Justice Projects Rule of Law Index 2020 showed that respect for the Rule of Law declined the most in Hungary and Poland in the whole EUEFTANorthAmerica region over the last five years. Member States with such rule of law records could not join the EU, were they to submit their applications today Kochenov, 2004. Now that illiberal regimes are part of the European club, they endanger the European project from within Pech and Scheppele, 2017. This is best visible in the field of judicial independence, which is both particularly fragile Kovács and Scheppele, 2019 and crucially important in the context of the European multilevel legal system GrabowskaMoroz, 2020. Independent judiciary is of course indispensable as the ultimate arbiter and guarantor of individual rights, but also vital for national judges and the Court of Justice of the European Union CJEU to maintain judicial dialogue necessary for the proper application of EU law. Both levels of the judiciary in the EU can only fulfil their multiple functions, if their independence is guaranteed. This can only be done if the continental standards enshrined in Article 61 ECHR are fully respected, as Article 19 TEU requires. Here is where the problems start while some fake Polish courts have already dismissed such basic standards as in breach of the Constitution Ploszka, 2022, it flows from CJEUs caselaw about itself that it is above such basic requirements Kochenov and Butler, 2022. Worse still, the inability of the CJEU to make up its mind on the vital issue of what it means to be an independent court established by law in the EU legal context led to a proliferation of numerous wanting standards of judicial independence, which are not only internally and mutually contradictory, but also apply differently to the different levels of European judiciary and fall short of meeting the minimum standards outlined by the European Court of Human Rights ECtHR. This rotten salami, to borrow from AG Bobeks culinary metaphor of this dangerous approach, boasts at least a handful of slices. The very idea of an independent court established by law which often requires a yes or no answer is that the parties are entitled to know whether the gowned presence in front of them is an independent judge or not came to mean context, as a matter of EU law whether someone is a lawful judge depends on the court to which the gowned person belongs, the type of action and other variables. Context amounts to lack of clarity concerning this vital aspect of the rule of law, endangering both the uniform application of EU law throughout the territory of the Union and the strict adherence to the rigorous human rights standards. The task of this contribution is to walk through a handful of available standards of judicial independence and discuss the broad implications of this EUmandated unprincipled rule of law relativism. In what follows we retrace the explosion of the illconceived plurality of standards on judicial independence and proceed standard by standard, to demonstrate how the EU enforces mutuallycontradictory rules pertaining to the heart of the rule of law. We start with the ECtHR approach in established by law Article 61 ECHR caselaw, which makes clear that lawfulness of the court is at the heart of the rule of law and is indispensable in a democratic society to even start speaking about judicial independence we then proceed to the strong standard applied by CJEU in preliminary references context culminating in Banco de Santander SA and a watereddown Getin Noble Bank version of the same, which does not in the name of judicial sic dialogue 2 even require a lawful judge and shows resolute lack of decisiveness, on the part of the CJEU in maintaining the EUwide definition of a court or tribunal in the sense of Article 267 TFEU. We proceed to discuss the groundbreaking yet so far ineffective CJEU caselaw attempting to shield courts in backsliding member states from the attacks by the executives, only to counterbalance it by the LM caselaw and its progeny, which values the idea of mutual trust above the protection of fundamental rights and adherence to basic rule of law requirements. Last but not least, we discuss the lowest point in the whole story the presumption of the CJEU entertained in Sharpston cases that even the lowest standards of lawful composition and independence do not apply to it, thus almost putting the supranational Court, through a contra legem interpretation of the primary law, outwith the ambit of Article 19 TEU minimal requirements unlawful arbitrary interference by the sovereign with the Courts composition in direct violation of EU and ECHR law has been greenlighted in numerous cases related to AG Sharpstons unlawful premature dismissal by both the Court and the General Court Kochenov and Butler, 2022. The requirement of a tribunal established by law in the sense of Article 61 ECHR is at the heart of ECtHRs approach to judicial independence. The establishment of a court by law is a necessary and indispensable requirement of the rule of law, turning the Convention into a rule of law instrument. 3 Significant caselaw comes down to several core elements to consider for details, see Registry of ECtHR, 2022. At issue is not only the legal basis underpinning the establishment of the court as such, but also the rules of staffing it with judges as well as compliance. So, crucially, the failure to comply with the rules of formation of the court is in itself a violation of Article 6 ECHR. 4 Acknowledging the criticism this caselaw received, the court painting in quite broad brush strokes Kosař and Leloup, 2022, it is important that ECtHR connects the rationale behind established by law with the essence of the preservation of democracy to ensure that the judicial organization in a democratic society does not depend on the discretion of the executive, but that it is regulated by law emanating from Parliament. 5 Three key elements of the established by law test flow from Ástráðsson 6 1 objectively and genuinely identifiable breach of domestic law 2 the breaches should be fundamental to the procedure and 3 availability of suitable judicial review based on Convention standards. This standard has been applied in countless cases against Poland, resulting in the finding of significant violations in the cases of outright unlawfully appointed judges of the Constitutional Tribunal 7 see GrabowskaMoroz, 2021 and the Supreme Court of Poland, including, especially, the Disciplinary Chamber 8 but also other chambers, as long as they include individuals who were appointed by the reformed National Council of the Judiciary NCJ, which was established, to have the purpose of undermining the independence of the Polish judiciary 9 and is thus an institution that cannot appoint members to any tribunal established by law ŚledzińskaSimon, 2018. 10 For decades before the advent of the Article 191 TEU caselaw starting with Portuguese Judges Pech and Kochenov, 2021 that gave CJEU broad jurisdiction over the national judiciaries, the main vehicle for the CJEU to deal with the whole array of issues pertaining to judicial independence lawful composition and established by law requirements was Article 267 TFEU. 11 CJEUs determination of the meaning of court or tribunal in the context of the preliminary reference procedure has been a pillar of EU law since the dawn of integration Broberg and Fenger, 2021. The core idea was inclusivity and control. The Court invited as many interlocutors as possible to establish vibrant judicial dialogue Eeckhout, 2015, while at the same time keeping the right to determine what court or tribunal meant. As a result, the criterion of independence was such that even bodies not recognized as courts and inserted within the administrative structures of the Member States were eligible and encouraged to make references Broberg, 2009, p. 221. The basic standard to assess all the bodies qualifying to use the preliminary rulings, although criticised for example Tridimas, 2003, p. 30, was set out with clarity since the early days of European integration, demanding that the body is established by law, permanent, enjoying compulsory jurisdiction, inter partes procedure, applying rules of law and is independent. 12 Pech and Platon 2018, p. 1942 foresaw potential conflicts between the permissive paradigm espoused by this caselaw and the more demanding and rightly so requirements of Article 19 TEU following Portuguese Judges. Banco de Santander SA, 13 upgraded the meaning of court or tribunal by reinforcing the minimal independence requirement a body where irremovability of members is not strictly guaranteed cannot meet Article 267 TFEU standard para. 67.