ICs can enable states in such circumstances by specifying rules and confirming compliance. These can be helpful signals.105 And ICs have other tasks than to resolve prisoners dilemmas. An impartial IC can contribute to law making and clarification, even if some parties to the dispute dont comply with the judgment itself.106 And human rights ICs can assure other parties of a states commitment, even if some states dont defer. Indeed, noncompliance with a human rights judgment may mainly hurt the reputation of the violator, in a complex reputation game.107 On the other hand, widespread noncompliance may challenge the legitimacy of ICs. If the task of ICs is to prevent free riders but several states persist, collective solutions may be out of reach, and no state may have reason to defer to the IC. And an IC cannot help a state credibly precommit to human rights compliance if many states fail to defer. The IC is no longer better placed than the state to provide assurance, and its legitimacy may be at stake. Some of the most difficult cases for ICs arise when they must adjudicate according to legal method, yet face recalcitrant states, which may refuse to comply or even exit from the jurisdiction of the court. Such cases might best be avoided by young ICs when they must build their legitimacy capital,108 since a noisy act of noncompliance by a powerful state that occurs early in a tribunals life may devastate its legitimacy.109 Consider finally concerns that full compliance notwithstanding, an institutions patent failure to deliver the goods for which it was created can impugn its legitimacy.110 Some such laudable objectives are human rights compliance, to bring suspected violators of international criminal law to justice, andarguablyto promote the international rule of law, or global justice. What if the ICC does not deter atrocities, or if bilateral investment treaties and tribunals do not foster more foreign direct investment? This account sheds some light on the complex consequences of such impactsor lack thereof on the legitimate authority of ICs. First, states and other deference constituencies have often tasked ICs with multiple, often incompatible, objectives. Thus the ICC will not be able to fully deter atrocities, and bring all perpetrators to justice, and bring full closure to conflicts, and create a complete historical record, and give voice to all victims, and reconcile enemies.111 Similar challenges occur when an IC takes on new objectives, in a layering of functions.112 Both the CJEU113 and the West African ECOWAS Court started as trade courts, but came to include human rights norms and cases.114 Such mission creep may be welcome insofar as the IC helps states better protect and promote the interests of individuals. However, the plurality of tasks gives rise to goal ambiguity, which yields problems of legitimacy.115 For instance, even though the ICC appears to have some deterrent effect,116 it will disappoint deference constituencies for failing to secure other objectives fully. More tasks for an IC increases the risks of failure and of inability to help every deference constituency act better. Critics may also challenge how the IC uses its discretion to balance multiple objectivesfor example, whether the ECOWAS Court or the CJEU give appropriate priority to human rights relative to market mobility. Still, even if objectives stand in some tension, the IC may enable states to act somewhat better.117 A second challenge occurs when the ICs mode of dispute resolution is a poor means for the broader objective. Then it does not perform the valuable task that states originally intended, and may not be legitimate unless it accomplishes other valuable tasks. One reason for such failure is the actions of others, be it states or other actors.118 Consider concerns that bilateral investment treaties BIT may fail to contribute to states objective of increasing foreign direct investment.119 A third concern is normatively problematic effects of ICs. The present account allows that an IC may not be legitimate even though it promotes states objectives as they intended.120 At least two sorts of problems may arise. Some critics worry that states have tasked ICs with normatively objectionable objectivesfor example, that the WTO AB upholds the global intellectual property regime to the detriment of poor populations, or that trade or investment treaties and ICs harms some states economies.121 Some ICs may thus enjoy false descriptive legitimacy.122 ICs may also be illegitimate if they have other negative impacts, neither intended nor foreseen. International law is often described as fragmented.123 One implication is that there are no agreed ways to harmonize possible conflicts among treaties and ICs, for example by requiring all of them to give human rights or environmental norms priority.124 Some claim that trade ICs prevent domestic governments from protecting individuals human rights or the environment against the impact of globalization.125 Others claim that international investment arbitration tribunals and the WTO AB hinder fairer international trade or prevent domestic distributive reforms, contrary to standards of global justice.126 Such criticisms and defences of the regimes and ICs rest on complex assessments of baselines, the complex interdependence among institutions, and alternative institutions.127 One challenge for such assessments of impacts concerns which standards of good reasons to apply.128 Some features of an ICs tasks, in complex interdependence with other actors, have implications for the sorts of norms it should interpret and apply, and the standards we should use to assess it. There are at least four reasons for caution in bringing our preferred normative standards to bear on ICs. First, the legal norms found in treaties are largely the result of interstate bargains, agreed under uncertainty and only partly insulated from power imbalances. Though not ideal, they still merit deference by ICs tasked to apply and interpret them. Second, these legal norms must be specified in ways suitable for application and robust against honest mistakes and abuse, by states, ICs, and other actors. For instance, ICs may have to assess a states claim to enjoy an exception to a rulefor example, due to hardship, emergencies, or violations of public morals.129 Such claims must be supportable by evidence, and all parties may make mistakes due to incompetence, ignorance or ill will. Third, the limited tasks and interdependence of ICs with other bodies counsels caution about which normative standards we should authorize ICs to apply, for example, when interpreting treaty norms.130 Several normative principles might primarily apply to the global legal and political order, while standardsfor example, of democratic accountabilitymay be appropriate for some institutions, but run counter to ICs task of helping democratic states bind themselves. Fourth, the standards appropriate for ICs may have to reflect a need to metacoordinate among states and other constituencies which disagree about substantive details of such standards, but which still recognize normative reasons to rely on a workable consensus.131 The normative legitimacy of ICs thus hinges in part on how well they perform their several tasks in a broad sense. But states preferences as stated in treaties are not decisive, and ICs may engender unintended beneficial or detrimental effects on states many appropriate reasons for action. These may go beyond explicit treaty objectivesextending perhaps to harmonizing and constitutionalizing international law, hollowing out domestic state sovereignty worth preserving, and indeed contributing to constitute states when delineating their scope of sovereignty. Some critics of legitimacy challenges to international law in general, and to ICs in particular, dismiss such concerns as nothing more than a privileged mode of social control, as pure noise that is rhetorically successful only as long as it avoids normative substance while upholding its semblance.132 This overview argues that such dismissals are at best premature. We can make some sense of the bewildering thicket of legitimacy challenges to international courts. One way to interpret and to assess many, if not all, such concerns draws on Razs account of legitimate authority, which drew attention to the peculiar tasks and complex multilevel institutional interdependence of these international courts. An IC enjoys such legitimate authority when it enhances actors ability to do what they already have appropriate reasons to doranging from promoting human rights and international criminal justice abroad to taking part in just global trade regimes. Such legitimacy criticisms must be determined in each case by delineating the tasks of that IC within the complex legal and political order. On this account, many, if not all, legitimacy criticisms appear to question whether the IC indeed serves such tasks, and whether the IC strikes the appropriate balance when the tasks conflict. Whether such criticisms are accurate, and whether any IC indeed exercises legitimate authority over various deference constituenciesstates and beyondremains to be determined.