Guidance is often learned as the result of litigated issues rather than through legislative directiona case of learning from the outcome of someone elses risk event. Even where guidance from professional organizations is available, its applicability to everyday clinic operations may fall short, leaving knowledge gaps. This article will review the various laws, legislative efforts, case law, and professional guidance that apply to storage, transport, and disposal of cryopreserved gametes and embryos. It will also discuss the potential risks and present practical considerations for developing working policies and procedures for the healthcare provider dealing with the daytoday issues of cryopreservation in the fertility clinic. Reproductive medicine and law cannot coexist without considering the ethical concerns raised by cryopreservation of gametes and embryos. Questions about status and value and rights are complex considerations when dealing with these issues 12Prescott D.E. Debele G.A. Shifting ethical and social conundrums and stunningly anachronistic laws what lawyers in adoption and assisted reproduction may want to consider.J Am Acad Matrim Law. 2017 30 127Google Scholar, 13Crockin S.L. Debele G.A. Ethical issues in assisted reproduction a primer for family law attorneys.J Am Acad Matrim Law. 2015 27 289308Google Scholar. Whereas the status of eggs and sperm appears to be somewhat less controversial, issues of value and ownership or control are often raised in instances where losses of irreplaceable gametes occur 14Letterie G, Fox D, Lawsuit frequency and claims basis over lost, damaged, and destroyed frozen embryos over a 10year period, Presented at the 75th Annual Meeting of the American Society Reproductive Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, October 1216, 2019.Google Scholar or the gamete contributor dies 15Bahadur G. Ethical challenges in reproductive medicine posthumous reproduction.Int Congr Ser. 2004 1266 295302Crossref Scopus 18 Google Scholar. Debates over the status, value, and rights of embryos are even more passionately espoused as healthcare providers, ethicists, lawyers, and patients struggle with how to handle human reproductive material or decide who has ownership or control over it 16Casolo J, CurryLedbetter C, Edmonds M, Field G, ONeill K, Poncia, M Eds.. Assisted reproductive technologies. Georgetown J Gender Law 20192313354.Google Scholar. This has led to a myriad of approaches from considering embryos as persons to considering them property, or conferring them with an interim status as having human potential but not yet life 17Crockin S.L. Gottschalk K.C. Legal Issues in gamete and embryo cryopreservation an overview.Semin Reprod Med. 2018 36 299310Crossref Scopus 2 Google Scholar. Each approach dictates its own path but must, at a minimum, be considered to better understand the basis for legal determinations either legislative or judicial, professional guidelines, and practical applications on the management of cryopreserved gametes and embryos. 127. Responsibility. Any physician or medical facility who causes in vitro fertilization of a human ovum in vitro will be directly responsible for the in vitro safekeeping of the fertilized ovum. 18LA Rev Stat 9 127, Responsibility.Google Scholar. The emphasized language of the Louisiana statute embodies the mantel of protection that placed in that state on fertility providers when it comes to storing gametes and embryos. But first, one must consider whether this practice is even allowed under current law. Regulations vary worldwide from the generally unregulated landscape of North America to European countries where all but a few have regulations on ART 19CalhazJorge C. De Geyter C.