Motrenko T. et al.Survey on ART and IUI legislation, regulation, funding and registries in European countries The European IVFmonitoring Consortium EIM for the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology ESHRE.Hum Reprod Open. 2020 1 hoz044Crossref Google Scholar. Most countries allow for freezing of gametes and embryos however, some countries ban egg freezing for nonmedical reasons e.g., Austria, France, Hungary, Lithuania, Malta, Norway, Serbia, and Slovenia 20European Society of Human Reproduction and EmbryologyEurope moves towards complete statutory regulation of ART.httpswww.eurekalert.orgpub_releases202002esohemt020320.phpDate accessed September 24, 2020Google Scholar, prohibit certain forms of embryo freezing e.g., Germany permits freezing of egg cells at the 2 pronucleic stage only 21Trappe H. Assisted reproductive technologies in Germany a review of the current situation.in Kreyenfeld M. Konietzka D. Childlessness in Europe contexts, causes, and consequences. Demographic Research Monographs A series of the Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research. Springer, Cham2017httpsdoi.org10.10079783319446677_13Crossref Scopus 6 Google Scholar, or limit the practice to certain patient populations only e.g., Poland, where a recent change to Polish law prevents single women from accessing treatment and prevents them from using previously frozen embryos unless they have a male partner in addition, their cryopreserved embryos can be given to a married couple without their consent after 20 years 22Brennan B. Single woman in Poland? Your embryos could be given to another couple.httpsmobile.abc.net.aunews20191124singlewomeninpolandembryoscouldbegiventoothers11706842Date accessed September 30, 2020Google Scholar. Where cryopreservation is routine, fertility clinics are cast as keepers of material that is full of hope and fraught with risks. Some of these risks include storage management, reduced or lost viability of specimens, rejection by gametes donors, and even contamination 6Alikani M. Parmegiani L. Human reproductive cell cryopreservation, storage, handling, and transport risks and risk management.Semin Reprod Med. 2018 36 265272Crossref PubMed Scopus 7 Google Scholar, and the associated costs. However, there are resources to assist in policy development to optimize the storage dilemma and reduce potential liabilities. The initial storage of gametes and embryos in fertility cliniclinked laboratories is by far the clearest of issues presented by the larger topic of human reproductive tissue cryostorage. Most fertility clinics are well aware of the necessity to follow professional guidelines that recommendand, in a few jurisdictions, regulatory guidelines that dictatethe use and maintenance of cryostorage tanks. With the recent exposure of several catastrophic gamete and embryo losses in the United States resulting from human error and cryotank failure 23Fox D. The legal limbo of lost embryos.httpsblog.petrieflom.law.harvard.edu20190708thelegallimbooflostembryosDate accessed September 24, 2020Google Scholar, the field has become even more aware of its obligation to protect the tissue under its care. Today, there is a resurgence of directives aimed at avoiding unintentional or negligent losses of cryopreserved gametes. The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union have encouraged further regulation in the form of a standardized approach to ensure high standards of quality and safety regarding cryopreserved tissue, including reproductive tissue. The European Society for Human Reproduction and Embryology, which provides professional guidelines, notes that most countries in the European Union EU have legislated assisted reproduction, many including specific regulations on cryostorage. For example, in Finland 24Ministry of Justice, FinlandAct on assisted fertility treatments 12372006, Section 24.httpswww.finlex.fienlakikaannokset2006en20061237.pdfDate accessed October 1, 2020Google Scholar and the United Kingdom 25Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990. Anyone who is involved in the procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of gametes, embryos or provide invitro fertilisation or artificial insemination treatments must obtain a license from the HFEA.Google Scholar, a facility must be licensed before cryostorage is allowed. Other countries may be moving in this direction. Responding to recent gamete and embryos losses in the United States, two states initiated legislation aimed at deterring similar risk events in the future. The New York State Department of Health issued standards for IVF laboratories that include inspections to ascertain that standards are met for the storage and handling of reproductive tissue, including requiring licensing requirements that dictate acceptable equipment and storage conditions and require adherence to relevant professional guidelines 26New York State Department of HealthExecutive summary of assisted reproductive technologies analysis and recommendations for public policy.httpswww.health.ny.govregulationstask_forcereports_publicationsexecsum.htmDate accessed November 5, 2020Google Scholar. At the time of this writing, New Jersey is poised to enact a state statute that would require licensing and regulation of embryo storage facilities, including fertility clinics 27State of New JerseyAn act concerning the regulation and licensure of embryo storage facilities and supplementing Title 26 of the Revised Statutes. S3075.httpswww.njleg.state.nj.us2018BillsA50004605_I1.HTMDate accessed November 5, 2020Google Scholar. Aside from the few noted legislative efforts, the everyday care and storage of gametes and embryos in the United States is generally guided by standards set by professional organizations. The College of American Pathologists, which accredits ART laboratories, upon request provides checklists and reviews of some practices aimed at quality control for cryostorage, namely, monitoring liquid nitrogen levels within cryotanks and monitoring any alarm system that may be in use for such cryotanks 28College of American PathologistsAccreditation checklists.httpswww.cap.orglaboratoryimprovementaccreditationaccreditationchecklistsDate accessed November 5, 2020Google Scholar. The American Association of Tissue Banks AATB guidance for cryopreservation storage and specimen handling arguably covers ART laboratories in its definition of a biorepository 29AATB GuidanceCurrent good tissue practices No. 3, June 27, 2006.httpswww.aatb.orgsitesdefaultfilesAATB20Guidance20Document20No.20320286.27.0629.pdfDate accessed September 28, 2020Google Scholar however, many fertility clinics do not accept its recommendations as binding. The Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine ASRM recently provided more detailed guidance for cryostorage, which emphasized best practices, including limited access to cryostorage tanks, easily observed cryostorage rooms, adherence to manufacturers recommendations for cryotank use, quality control for liquid nitrogen and oxygen monitoring, cryostorage tank alarm systems, and storage tank inventories 30Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive MedicineCryostorage of reproductive tissues in the in vitro fertilization laboratory a committee opinion.Feril Steril. 2020 114 486491Abstract Full Text Full Text PDF Scopus 5 Google Scholar. One of the predominant concerns regarding cryostorage of embryos revolves around the length of time that embryos may be stored. Questions of reduced viability over time continue to be expressed, even in the face of studies that prove otherwise 31Ueno S.