Abstract The development of a corpus of fundamental rights at the EU level has accentuated the constitutional pluralism that existed within many national legal systems. Illustrating the dynamic, the adjudication of the age discrimination provisions of the 2000 Framework Directive on Employment Equality in Germany produced two major outcomes. First, interactions between the ECJ and the German labour courts served to upgrade rights protections afforded to workers, relative to national constitutional standards. Second, the structural position of the German Federal Constitutional Court, as a privileged locus of rights protection, was weakened, while the authority of the labour courts was enhanced. Looking ahead, we are entering a new era of rightsbased legal integration that will further serve to Europeanize national law, while undermining the supposed unity and coherence of national legal orders. Keywords Constitutional pluralismEuropean Court of JusticeEuropeanizationlabour lawlegal integrationnondiscrimination Notes For a recent review of the social science literature on these topics, see Stone Sweet Citation2010. In many European legal orders, three such sources national constitutional rights, EU fundamental rights, the EU Charter of Rights, and the European Convention on Human Rights coexist and, in some areas, substantively overlap. Individuals have a choice of which source to plead and judges have a choice of which right to enforce. We take no normative view in this article on whether the constitutional rhetoric is appropriate, or whether developments in this domain of law are normatively defensible. Marshall I 15284 Dori C9192. This gap in protection was partly closed by the emergence of the doctrine of state liability, holding that national judges can order state officials to compensate private parties for compliance failures see Francovich C6 990 Brasserie du Pecheur C4693 and C4893. Jenkins 9680 Bilka 17084 Rinner Kühn 17188 as consolidated in Enderby C12792.