There are at least four reasons for caution in bringing our preferred normative standards to bear on ICs. First, the legal norms found in treaties are largely the result of interstate bargains, agreed under uncertainty and only partly insulated from power imbalances. Though not ideal, they still merit deference by ICs tasked to apply and interpret them. Second, these legal norms must be specified in ways suitable for application and robust against honest mistakes and abuse, by states, ICs, and other actors. For instance, ICs may have to assess a states claim to enjoy an exception to a rulefor example, due to hardship, emergencies, or violations of public morals.129 Such claims must be supportable by evidence, and all parties may make mistakes due to incompetence, ignorance or ill will. Third, the limited tasks and interdependence of ICs with other bodies counsels caution about which normative standards we should authorize ICs to apply, for example, when interpreting treaty norms.130 Several normative principles might primarily apply to the global legal and political order, while standardsfor example, of democratic accountabilitymay be appropriate for some institutions, but run counter to ICs task of helping democratic states bind themselves. Fourth, the standards appropriate for ICs may have to reflect a need to metacoordinate among states and other constituencies which disagree about substantive details of such standards, but which still recognize normative reasons to rely on a workable consensus.131 The normative legitimacy of ICs thus hinges in part on how well they perform their several tasks in a broad sense. But states preferences as stated in treaties are not decisive, and ICs may engender unintended beneficial or detrimental effects on states many appropriate reasons for action. These may go beyond explicit treaty objectivesextending perhaps to harmonizing and constitutionalizing international law, hollowing out domestic state sovereignty worth preserving, and indeed contributing to constitute states when delineating their scope of sovereignty. Some critics of legitimacy challenges to international law in general, and to ICs in particular, dismiss such concerns as nothing more than a privileged mode of social control, as pure noise that is rhetorically successful only as long as it avoids normative substance while upholding its semblance.132 This overview argues that such dismissals are at best premature. We can make some sense of the bewildering thicket of legitimacy challenges to international courts. One way to interpret and to assess many, if not all, such concerns draws on Razs account of legitimate authority, which drew attention to the peculiar tasks and complex multilevel institutional interdependence of these international courts. An IC enjoys such legitimate authority when it enhances actors ability to do what they already have appropriate reasons to doranging from promoting human rights and international criminal justice abroad to taking part in just global trade regimes. Such legitimacy criticisms must be determined in each case by delineating the tasks of that IC within the complex legal and political order. On this account, many, if not all, legitimacy criticisms appear to question whether the IC indeed serves such tasks, and whether the IC strikes the appropriate balance when the tasks conflict. Whether such criticisms are accurate, and whether any IC indeed exercises legitimate authority over various deference constituenciesstates and beyondremains to be determined.