2011. Indigenous and colonial origins of comparative economic development the case of colonial India and Africa. In History, Historians and Development Policy A Necessary Dialogue, Edited by Bayly, C. A., Rao, V., Szreter, S. and Woolcock, M. 3964. Manchester University Press. Google Scholar 51, who forcefully argues that for development to occur people need to have the belief that they can succeed and that their own societies are essentially benign. 6. So understood, most of the vociferous critics of development raise objections to the means by which andor through whom it is brought about, not the ends as articulated here. Even when criticising a focus on economic growth, most such critics are not calling for a return to a preindustrial economy or premodern health care. 7. As Figure 1 imperfectly shows, an additional feature of modernity is that it separates these four realms into discrete entities, requiring people to move between qualitatively different roles as say consumer, citizen, employee and parishioner. This was the essence of Karl Polanyis 1944 Polanyi, K. 1944. The Great Transformation, Boston Beacon Press. Google Scholar classis thesis on the great transformation, in which he argued that, as a result of the development process, the economy became increasingly disembedded from society and both thereby became subject to a different set of logics, rules, expectations and power relations. In those countries or communities at the centre of Figure 1 these four realms remain essentially one and the same religious, political, judicial, commercial and civic leadership, for example, is exercised as a single entity. A defining feature of modernity, on the other hand, is the separation of church and state, the separation of powers, of science and religion, of media and state a free press, of knowledge into professional disciplines, and so forth, a process that has usually been accompanied by great conflict. 8. The enduring power and resonance of Scott 1998 Scott, J. C. 1998. Seeing Like a State How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed, New Haven, CT Yale University Press. Google Scholar resides in large part on his documenting of how fully, in the middle decades of the twentieth century, both the political leftright and the global northsouth bought into bureaucratic highmodernism as the preferred scheme for improving the human condition. 9. Hence Francis Fukuyama could declare the end of history in 1989 because, with the collapse of Communism as a viable alternative economic system and the triumph of big D Democracy as a political system, history had fulfilled its teleological objectives of converging into the peak forms all that was left was a bit of little h historical tidying up not worthy of a big H transformational effort. 10.