100. Antimicrob Resist Infect Control. 2024 Oct 8;13(1):119. doi: 
10.1186/s13756-024-01474-6.

Can probiotics trigger a paradigm shift for cleaning healthcare environments? A 
narrative review.

Denkel LA(1)(2), Voss A(3), Caselli E(4), Dancer SJ(5), Leistner R(6)(7)(8), 
Gastmeier P(6)(7), Widmer AF(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hygiene and Environmental Medicine, Charité Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu 
Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Hindenburgdamm 27, 12203, Berlin, 
Germany. luisa.denkel@charite.de.
(2)National Reference Center for the Surveillance of Nosocomial Infections, 
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität 
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, 
Germany. luisa.denkel@charite.de.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Section of Microbiology, Department of Chemical, Pharmaceutical, and 
Agricultural Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(5)NHS Lanarkshire & Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK.
(6)Institute of Hygiene and Environmental Medicine, Charité Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu 
Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Hindenburgdamm 27, 12203, Berlin, 
Germany.
(7)National Reference Center for the Surveillance of Nosocomial Infections, 
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität 
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, 
Germany.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology, Charité 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, 
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(9)Faculty of Medicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(10)Swissnoso - Swiss National Center for Infection Prevention, Bern, 
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The environment of healthcare institutions plays a major role in the 
transmission of multidrug resistant organisms (MDRO) and likely in subsequent 
healthcare-associated infections (HAIs). Probiotic cleaning products are a novel 
option for environmental cleaning. They represent a sustainable and 
biodegradable alternative to conventional chemical disinfectants for controlling 
microbial bioburden, and preventing pathogen transmission in hospital 
environments. High-quality studies including randomized clinical trials (RCT) 
triggered a summary with expert recommendations until further studies allow a 
critical review and meta-analysis of the data.
METHODS: Infection control experts from five European countries summarized 
available data as of June 2023. Authors presented their published RCTs, reviewed 
the existing literature on probiotic cleaning, summarized the results and 
identified knowledge gaps and subsequent research needs.
RESULTS: Probiotic cleaning was similarly effective for reducing HAI-related 
pathogens, enveloped viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 and MDRO in environmental 
samples compared to conventional chemical disinfectants. More importantly, 
probiotic cleaning was non-inferior to disinfectants in terms of preventing HAI 
in a large RCT. In addition, probiotic cleaning has also been shown to reduce 
antimicrobial resistance genes (ARG), costs and antimicrobial consumption in 
other hospital trials. They are biodegradable, do not require any protection for 
chemical hazards, and are compliant with occupational health. A paradigm shift, 
however, requires a very strong evidence to justify for such a change. In the 
past, this evidence was limited by the heterogeneity of study design, products, 
protocols, and few studies on clinical outcomes used in the trials. Furthermore, 
the regulatory, safety, and quality aspects of probiotic cleaning products are 
not, yet, completely defined and require clearing by authorities.
CONCLUSION: To date, probiotic cleaning is a breakthrough technology and a 
biological alternative for chemical disinfectant when treating hospital 
environment. It may also have a positive effect on MDRO transmission. However, 
the different compositions of probiotic products will require standardization, 
and more robust data should be generated to support these promising results on 
different compositions. This may trigger a paradigm shift in cleaning of 
healthcare institutions from chemical to biological control of the hospital 
environment.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13756-024-01474-6
PMID: 39380032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]