22. J Adv Nurs. 2024 Oct 9. doi: 10.1111/jan.16530. Online ahead of print.

COVID-19's Impact in Long-Term Care Facilities: The Health and Coping Strategies 
of Older Adults and Their Families.

Cohen C(1), Abt M(1), Bélanger L(2), Ortoleva Bucher C(1).

Author information:
(1)La Source School of Nursing, HES-SO University of Applied Sciences and Arts 
Western Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Département Sciences infirmières, Université du Québec en Outaouais, 
Gatineau, QC, Canada.

AIM: Describe the stressors that long-term care facility (LTCF) residents and 
their family members were exposed to during the COVID-19 pandemic, the resources 
they mobilised to cope with them, and the strategies used by professionals to 
support them.
DESIGN: A descriptive qualitative design study.
METHOD: Between March 2021 and February 2022, we carried out semi-structured 
interviews with 8 LTCF residents, 11 family members, and 6 focus groups made up 
of healthcare and support staff from 8 LTCFs.
RESULTS: Three themes emerged: (1) residents and family members: separated and 
suffering, (2) residents and family members: reinventing themselves, and (3) 
staff: attempts to maintain residents' well-being.
CONCLUSION: LTCF Residents' and their family members' exposure to the various 
stressors linked to the COVID-19 pandemic generated suffering. Healthcare and 
support staff implemented strategies to support them, notably to maintain links 
between them. Some deep reflection must occur on the concepts of LTCF residents' 
autonomy and self-determination when implementing protective measures in future 
pandemic situations.
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PROFESSION AND PATIENT CARE: This study has provided new 
insights into the nature of the stressors faced by LTCF residents and their 
families, and the measures implemented by professionals to support them. The 
role of the families of LTCF residents needs to be better recognised. Our 
results indicate the importance of involving nurses in discussions on patient 
autonomy and self-determination when implementing protective measures (in a 
pandemic situation).
IMPACT: Exploring the nature of the stressors experienced by LTCF residents and 
their families enables professionals to tailor strategies to support them. 
Maintaining residents' self-determination is essential when implementing 
protective measures. Families involved with residents must be recognised and 
included in the assessment of stressors and the personalisation and 
implementation of strategies to support LTCF residents.
PATIENT OR PUBLIC CONTRIBUTION: No Patient or Public Contribution.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Advanced Nursing published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jan.16530
PMID: 39382352