85. Nanoscale. 2024 Oct 9. doi: 10.1039/d4nr02612h. Online ahead of print.

Electrostatic interactions and structural transformations in viral shells.

Golushko IY(1), Roshal DS(1), Konevtsova OV(1), Rochal SB(1), Podgornik 
R(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Physics, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia. 
rochal_s@yahoo.fr.
(2)School of Physical Sciences and Kavli Institute for Theoretical Sciences, 
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Soft Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
(4)Wenzhou Institute of the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wenzhou, 
Zhejiang 325000, China.
(5)Department of Theoretical Physics, Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia. rudolf.podgornik@ijs.si.

Structural transformations occurring in proteinaceous viral shells (capsids) can 
be induced by changing the pH of bathing solution, thus modifying the 
dissociation equilibrium of ionizable amino acids in proteins. To analyze the 
effects of electrostatic interactions on viral capsids, we construct a model of 
2D isotropic elastic shells with embedded point charges located in the centers 
of mass of individual proteins. We find that modification of the electrostatic 
interactions between proteins affects not only the size and shape of capsids, 
but in addition induces substantial deformations of hexamers in capsid 
structures. Using bacteriophage P22 and Nudarelia capensis omega virus (NωV) as 
examples, we analyze the capsid faceting and propose an explanation as to why 
the hexamers in spherical procapsid are skewed, while they acquire a regular 
shape in the faceted state. Also, we examine the electrostatic and elastic 
effects that can explain different shapes of coronavirus shells decorated with 
spikes, which are often localized in compact areas over the shell surface. The 
proposed mechanism of local curvature generation is supported by the remarkable 
correspondence between the shell shape and the distribution of spikes in model 
and observed shells.

DOI: 10.1039/d4nr02612h
PMID: 39380336