39. Adv Med Educ Pract. 2024 Oct 4;15:923-933. doi: 10.2147/AMEP.S472324. 
eCollection 2024.

Dual Coaching of Medical Clerkship Students' History Taking Skills by Volunteer 
Inpatients at the Bedside and Faculty Physicians on Zoom During the COVID-19 
Pandemic.

Patel KS(1), Anderson RJ(#)(1), Becker CB(#)(1), Taylor WC(#)(1), Liu AF(#)(1), 
Varshney AS(#)(2), Ali NB(#)(1), Nath BJ(#)(3), Pelletier SR(4), Shields HM(1), 
Osman NY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Office of Medical Education, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Coaching is a well-described means of providing real-time, actionable 
feedback to learners. We aimed to determine whether dual coaching from faculty 
physicians and real inpatients led to an improvement in history-taking skills of 
clerkship medical students.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Expert faculty physicians (on Zoom) directly observed 13 
clerkship medical students as they obtained a history from 26 real, hospitalized 
inpatients (in person), after which students received immediate feedback from 
both the physician and the patient. De-identified audio-video recordings of all 
interviews were scored by independent judges using a previously validated 
clinical rating tool to assess for improvement in history-taking skills between 
the two interviews. Finally, all participants completed a survey with Likert 
scale questions and free-text prompts.
RESULTS: Students' history-taking skills - specifically in the domains of 
communication, medical knowledge and professional conduct - on the validated 
rating tool, as evaluated by the independent judges, did not significantly 
improve between their first and second patient interviews. However, students 
rated the dual coaching as overwhelmingly positive (average score of 1.43, with 
1 being Excellent and 5 being Poor), with many appreciating the specificity and 
timeliness of the feedback. Patients also rated the experience very highly 
(average score of 1.23, with 1 being Excellent and 5 being Poor), noting that 
they gained new insights into medical training.
CONCLUSION: Students value receiving immediate and specific feedback and real 
patients enjoy participating in the feedback process. Dual physician-patient 
coaching is a unique way to incorporate more direct observation into 
undergraduate medical education curricula.

© 2024 Patel et al.

DOI: 10.2147/AMEP.S472324
PMCID: PMC11460274
PMID: 39381803

Conflict of interest statement: KSP reports consulting fees from Medlearnity, 
Inc. CBB receives compensation from Wolters Kluwer for authoring chapters for 
UpToDate. ASV reports consulting fees from Broadview Ventures, Hippocratic AI, 
and Baim Clinical Research Institute. All of these are outside of the submitted 
work. The authors report no other potential conflicts of interest in this work.