2. J Complement Integr Med. 2024 Oct 10. doi: 10.1515/jcim-2024-0186. Online
ahead  of print.

A critical review on the active anti-viral metabolites of bioprospecting 
traditionally used plant species from semi-arid regions of the subcontinent.

Naz A(1), Chowdhury A(2), Pareek S(3), Kumar P(4), Poddar NK(5).

Author information:
(1)Jindal School of Liberal Arts and Humanities, O.P. Jindal Global University, 
Sonipat, Haryana, India.
(2)Jindal School of Environment and Sustainability, O.P. Jindal Global 
University, Sonipat, Haryana, India.
(3)Department of Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 
India.
(4)Department of Physics, 385092 Manipal University Jaipur , Jaipur, Rajasthan, 
India.
(5)Department of Biosciences, 385092 Manipal University Jaipur , Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, India.

Plants are crucial medicinal resources, with 80 % of people relying on them for 
primary healthcare. The search for natural antiviral compounds is increasing, 
especially in semi-arid ecosystems where abiotic stress promotes the production 
of beneficial secondary metabolites. This review highlights semi-arid plants 
with the potential as functional foods to combat viral diseases and other 
illnesses. Literature was searched in databases like ScienceDirect to gather 
information on novel compounds from stress-tolerant semi-arid plant species. 
These compounds have potential uses in treating viral infections and other 
health issues such as diabetes and high blood pressure. The review screened 61 
semi-arid plants known for their antiviral metabolites. Eight plants were 
identified with novel antiviral compounds. Key metabolites include 
agathisflavone, pectic arabinogalactan, azadirachtin, aloin, aloe-emodin, 
aloesaponarin I, allicin, terpenoids, chlorogenic acids, curcumin, chromones, 
β-sitosterol, lupeol, oleuropein, carissol, β-amyrin, and 
∆-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Stress-tolerant semi-arid plants are significant 
sources of metabolites for treating infectious diseases and boosting immune 
systems. Further research on these metabolites in animal models is needed to 
verify their efficacy for treating human diseases during endemic and pandemic 
outbreaks, such as COVID-19.

© 2024 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/jcim-2024-0186
PMID: 39382949