88. Nurs Crit Care. 2024 Oct 8. doi: 10.1111/nicc.13185. Online ahead of print.

Prone position applied to COVID-19 patients: Systematic review-meta-analysis.

Tülüce D(1), Kaplan Serin E(2), Yıldız Karadeniz E(3).

Author information:
(1)Nursing Department, Faculty of Health Sciences, Osmaniye Korkut Ata 
University, Osmaniye, Turkey.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine Nursing, Faculty of Nursing, Mersin 
University, Mersin, Turkey.
(3)Department of Fundamentals of Nursing, Faculty of Nursing, Mersin University, 
Mersin, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Position change and interventions to increase lung capacity should 
be considered in mechanically ventilated patients. The most effective of these 
is the prone position.
AIM: This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to determine the effects of 
the prone position on respiratory parameters and outcomes and to guide nurses 
working in the intensive care unit.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: This systematic review-meta-analysis was conducted in 
accordance with the Preferred Reporting in Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 
guideline. ScienceDirect, CINAHL, Academic Search Complete (EBSCOhost), MEDLINE, 
EMBASE, Web of Science, Cochrane and PubMed databases were searched between 
January 2022 and January 2023 to access studies related to prone position in 
COVID-19 patients.
RESULTS: Twenty-three studies were included. This meta-analysis shows that a 
prone position is feasible and can achieve improvements in gas exchange. Prone 
position increases PaO2/FiO2 in the majority of patients followed with a 
diagnosis of COVID-19 and severe hypoxemic.
CONCLUSIONS: The study has shown that the prone position is effective in 
improving patients' respiratory function and oxygenation.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: The results presented in this article support 
the notion that the prone position can be an effective strategy in the clinical 
management of COVID-19 patients.

© 2024 British Association of Critical Care Nurses.

DOI: 10.1111/nicc.13185
PMID: 39380309