89. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2024 Oct 8;70(9):1-9. doi: 
10.14715/cmb/2024.70.9.1.

Assessment of immunological factors in COVID-19 patients treated by convalescent 
plasma.

Heidari M(1), Yaghobi R(2), Moghadami M(3), Zand F(4), Fallahi MJ(5), 
Pourfathollah AA(6), Zarnegar G(7), Salah A(8), Soleimanian S(9), Golshan M(10), 
Jangjoo A(11), Karimi MH(12).

Author information:
(1)Transplant Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran. mozhde.heidari@gmail.com.
(2)Transplant Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran. rayaviro@yahoo.com.
(3)Health PolicyResearch Center, Institute of Health, Shiraz University of 
Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. mohsen168@gmail.com.
(4)Anesthesiology and Critical Care Research Center, Shiraz University of 
Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. zandf@sums.ac.ir.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran. falahijavad@yahoo.com.
(6)Immunology Department, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran. pourfa@modares.ac.ir.
(7)High Institute for Research and Education in Transfusion Medicine (IRTEM), 
Tehran, Iran. g.zarnegar8@gmail.com.
(8)High Institute for Research and Education in Transfusion Medicine (IRTEM), 
Tehran, Iran. salahibto@yahoo.com.
(9)Transplant Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran. saeedehsoleimanian@gmail.com.
(10)Transplant Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran. mehdigolshan1515@gmail.com.
(11)Department of Emergency Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, iran. karimimh@sums.ac.ir.
(12)Transplant Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran. karimimh@sums.ac.ir.

Following the outbreak of COVID-19, several immunotherapy methods were used to 
modulate the immune responses of patients. In this study, we aimed to evaluate 
the immune response to COVID-19 in patients receiving convalescent plasma. In 
this regard, this randomized controlled trial included 30 patients who were 
divided into two groups according to receiving convalescent plasma or normal 
control plasma. Samples from both groups were collected on days 0, 1, 3, 5 and 7 
after plasma infusion. We measured the expression level of TLR7/8, IRF3/7, 
CTLA-4, PD-1 and T cell transcription factors by Real-time PCR in the mentioned 
groups. Thirteen cytokines were also evaluated using flow cytometry method. 
Results showed that compared to the normal control plasma group, the expression 
levels of TLR7, 8, IRF3, 7 and PD-1 and CTLA-4, on days 3, 5 and 7 after 
convalescent plasma infusion, were significantly decreased. On the other hand,  
Gene expression results showed that the expression levels of Tbet, RORγ3 and 
Foxp3 on days 3, 5 and 7 after convalescent plasma infusion were significantly 
increased compared to the normal control plasma group. After convalescent plasma 
infusion, the viral load was significantly decreased compared to the normal 
control plasma group. Convalescent plasma infusion also reduced the plasma 
cytokines levels, including IL-6, IL-10, and IL-4, and enhanced the level of 
IL-2, IFN- γ and perforin comparing the normal control plasma group. According 
to the results, the convalescent plasma infusion led to a decrease in the 
expression of innate immunity receptors and an increase in the expression of 
transcription factors of adaptive immunity. Therefore, it may be concluded that 
convalescent plasma infusion can modulate the immune response. To achieve a 
reliable consequence, further studies are required.

DOI: 10.14715/cmb/2024.70.9.1
PMID: 39380285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]