24. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 Oct 9:e0156724. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01567-24. Online
 ahead of print.

Exploring the causes of variability in quality of oropharyngeal swab sampling 
for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid testing and proposed improvement measures: a 
multicenter, double-blind study.

Zhu J(#)(1), Xing F(#)(2), Li Y(#)(3), Wu C(4), Li S(5), Wang Q(6), Huang J(2), 
Zhang Y(1), Zheng X(7), Liu Z(8), Rao J(9), Hong R(10), Tian S(11), Xiong S(12), 
Tan L(5), Chen X(1), Li Y(1), He W(11), Hong X(1), Xia J(4), Zhou Q(6), Zhang 
Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Virology, Department of Infectious Diseases, The Second 
Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Infection Control, The University of 
Hong Kong-Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Anhui 
Medical University, The First People's Hospital of Hefei, Hefei, China.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of 
Hubei Province, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, China.
(5)Division of Liver Disease, The Second People's Hospital of Fuyang City, 
Fuyang, China.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Anhui 
Medical University, Hefei, China.
(7)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
(8)Department of Infectious Diseases, Anqing Municipal Hospital, Anqing, China.
(9)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Lu'an Affiliated Hospital of Anhui 
Medical University, Lu'an People's Hospital, Lu'an, China.
(10)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tongling Municipal Hospital, Tongling, 
China.
(11)Division of Liver Disease, Traditional Chinese Hospital of LuAn, Anhui 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Lu'an, China.
(12)Department of Infectious Diseases, Funan County People's Hospital, Fuyang, 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

Although coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has not been considered a public 
health emergency of international concern since last year, intermittent regional 
impacts still persist, and accurate testing remains crucial. Ribonuclease P 
protein subunit P30 (RPP30) RNA, known for its broad and stable expression in 
tissue cells, was used to evaluate samples from 10 hospitals with over 3,000 
negative nucleic acid tests. The results revealed that the overall pass rate for 
the collected samples was consistently low and exhibited significant 
heterogeneity. After reassessing the evaluative effectiveness of RPP30 RNA Ct 
values from the samples of 132 positive individuals under quarantine 
observation, it was used to identify factors affecting sampling quality. These 
factors included different stages ranging from sample collection to PCR 
processing, various characteristics of both samplers and individuals being 
sampled, as well as sampling season and location. The results indicated that 
post-sampling handling had minimal impact, winter and fever clinic samples 
showed higher quality, whereas children's samples had lower quality. The key 
finding was that the characteristics of samplers were closely related to 
sampling quality, emphasizing the role of subjectivity. Quality control warnings 
led to substantial improvements, confirming this finding. Consequently, although 
there are various factors during the testing process, the most critical aspect 
is to improve, supervise, and maintain standardized practices among sampling 
staff.IMPORTANCEThis study further confirmed the reliability of internal 
references (IRs) in assessing sample quality, and utilized a large sample IR 
data to comprehensively and multidimensionally identify significant interference 
factors in nucleic acid test results. By further reminding and intervening in 
the subjective practices of specimen collectors, good results could be achieved.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01567-24
PMID: 39382280