94. Arch Public Health. 2024 Oct 8;82(1):177. doi: 10.1186/s13690-024-01400-7.

Strengthening crisis resilience in German primary care by using quality 
indicators: findings of a process evaluation in the RESILARE project.

Poß-Doering R(1), Koetsenruijter J(2), Litke NA(2), Weis A(3), Köppen M(4), 
Kümmel S(4), Szecsenyi J(2)(4), Wensing M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Practice and Health Services Research, University 
Hospital Heidelberg, University Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 130.3, 69120, 
Heidelberg, Germany. regina.poss-doering@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Department of General Practice and Health Services Research, University 
Hospital Heidelberg, University Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 130.3, 69120, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Section for Translational Medical Ethics, National Center for Tumor Diseases 
(NCT) Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)aQua Institute, Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, health systems worldwide have been confronted with 
several crises such as natural disasters or the COVID-19 pandemic, that affected 
lives and health of many people. In light of waves of infections and heat, 
climate change is considered to be the biggest health threat of the 21st 
century. Strengthening individual and organizational crisis resilience in 
healthcare settings thus becomes a crucial factor in maintaining care quality 
and protecting vulnerable patients during such crises. The RESILARE project 
therefore aimed to develop and evaluate quality indicators that support primary 
care practices in preparing for and adapting to crisis-related challenges.
METHODS: In a three-phased process, indicator development was based on 
systematic literature research and qualitative data, a two-stage expert panel 
process, and pilot testing in a maximum of n = 35 ambulatory practices during an 
outreach visit. Practice-individual indicator-related status and benchmarking 
information were provided via feedback reports to complete the audit and 
feedback program. A mixed-methods process evaluation used semistructured 
interviews with participating General practitioners and nonphysician health 
professionals to explore support and challenges for the implementation of the 
derived set of quality indicators. Two online surveys were conducted to evaluate 
all indicators and the two-part feedback report. Qualitative data were analyzed 
inductively using a thematic analysis approach. Survey data were analyzed 
descriptively.
RESULTS: A total of n = 32 indicators covered four domains: (1) individual 
resilience, (2) crisis prevention, (3) organizational resilience, and (4) 
climate resilience. N = 34 practices participated in the piloting and the 
process evaluation. Participants generally attributed a high relevance to the 
domains, and considered the indicator set suitable for implementation into 
existing quality management systems. Planning and implementation of measures 
that strengthen crisis resilience in practices were triggered or intensified by 
piloting the indicators and by the two-part feedback report. The identified 
challenges involved the volume of indicators and practice-individual 
implementation of renewable energy sources on rented premises. Participants 
expressed their desire for peer exchange regarding proven concepts for crisis 
resilience.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13690-024-01400-7
PMID: 39380089