96. Res Involv Engagem. 2024 Oct 8;10(1):102. doi: 10.1186/s40900-024-00637-4.

Patient and public involvement in an evidence synthesis project: description of 
and reflection on involvement.

Thomson K(1), Todhunter-Brown A(2), Brady MC(2), Campbell P(2), Dorris L(3), 
Hunter SM(4), Nicolson DJ(5)(6), Hazelton C(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational Therapy, Human Nutrition & Dietetics, Glasgow 
Caledonian University, Glasgow, UK. Katie.thomson@gcu.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Nursing & Community Health, School of Health and Life Sciences, 
Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow, UK.
(3)Paediatric Neurosciences, Royal Hospital for Children, NHS Greater Glasgow & 
Clyde, Glasgow, UK.
(4)School of Allied Health Professions, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Keele University, Keele, UK.
(5)Stakeholder representative, Edinburgh, UK.
(6)Healthcare Improvement Scotland, Edinburgh, UK.
(7)Department of Vision Sciences, School of Health and Life Sciences, Glasgow 
Caledonian University, Glasgow, UK.

BACKGROUND: We conducted an NIHR-funded evidence synthesis project, reviewing 
evidence relating to interventions for perceptual disorders following stroke. 
This related paper describes how people with lived experience of stroke-related 
perceptual disorders contributed to and influenced the project, and identifies 
lessons for future review projects.
METHODS: We planned our patient and public involvement and engagement (PPIE) 
activities within a study protocol, described according to the domains of the 
ACTIVE framework; these were founded on principles for good practice in PPIE. 
Activities occurred across the lifespan of the project, consisting primarily of 
group discussions and voting to determine if there was consensus. To assess 
impact and individual experiences, we sought feedback using an evaluation form 
after each discussion, and conducted an online meeting at the end of the project 
to allow further reflection.
RESULTS: We recruited five people to a Lived Experience Group, including two 
stroke survivors and three carers. Members attended one face-to-face meeting 
during the development of the review. Subsequent activities were all held online 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic; with six online meetings, plus email interactions. 
Positive impacts of the Lived Experience Group on the reviews included clear 
definitions of key terms, selection of outcome measures, agreement on 
implications of review findings, and identification of research recommendations. 
Key challenges identified related to the complexity of the topic and challenges 
in the use of new online technology as a consequence of the COVID-pandemic.
CONCLUSIONS: A number of lessons were learned during this project. Specific 
recommendations for future PPIE are to ensure that those involved have an 
opportunity to get to know one another, and to provide optional sessions to 
increase familiarity with online meeting software, clear explanations of the 
purpose of involvement and specific feedback after each activity. These lessons 
should be considered when planning the PPIE within future reviews.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40900-024-00637-4
PMID: 39380075