34. ACR Open Rheumatol. 2024 Oct 9. doi: 10.1002/acr2.11753. Online ahead of
print.

Transition Guide Dissemination to Foster Patient-Care Team Conversations: A 
Childhood Arthritis Rheumatology Research Alliance Transition Learning 
Collaborative Pilot Implementation Study.

Chang JC(1), Alonzi G(2), Sears C(3), Bitencourt N(4), Hernandez A(5), Peterson 
R(6), Alperin R(7), Overbury RS(8), Dela Paz M(9), Waqar-Cowles LN(3), White 
PH(10), Carandang K(11), Lawson EF(9); CARRA Transition Workgroup.

Author information:
(1)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts and Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(4)Loma Linda University Medical Center, Loma Linda, California.
(5)Scottish Rite for Children, Dallas, Texas.
(6)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Dell 
Children's Medical Center, Austin, Texas.
(7)New York University Langone Health, New York, New York.
(8)University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(9)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(10)Got Transition/The National Alliance to Advance Adolescent Health and The 
George Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia.
(11)Young Patients' Autoimmune Research & Empowerment Alliance, San Diego, 
California.

OBJECTIVE: Uptake of evidence-informed health care transition processes among 
pediatric rheumatologists is low despite poor outcomes of transition from 
pediatric to adult care. We piloted a learning collaborative model to implement 
transition guides. We dually assessed implementation outcomes and changes in 
reported patient-care team discussions about transition.
METHODS: This was a type II hybrid effectiveness-implementation pilot study of 
transition guide dissemination to patients at least 14 years old with rheumatic 
conditions across nine pediatric rheumatology centers in the Childhood Arthritis 
Rheumatology Research Alliance Transition Learning Collaborative. We evaluated 
implementation outcomes (feasibility, adaptations, and fidelity) and the 
proportion of patients surveyed that reported having discussions with their care 
team regarding transfer planning.
RESULTS: Six sites were retained through the COVID-19 pandemic (below 70% 
target). Five out of six sites contributed outcome data (met 80% target) but 
with substantial heterogeneity in how transition guides were shared (eg, 
in-person, electronic messages, and posted flyers), and data were collected. The 
pooled proportion of respondents having discussed transfer planning with their 
care team was 39% preimplementation (n = 239; 95% confidence interval [CI] 
32%-46%) and 55% postimplementation (n = 864; 95% CI 36%-73%). After 
implementation, there were significant increases in the likelihood of 
respondents recalling receiving a transition guide (odds ratio [OR] 2.58, 95% CI 
1.35-4.92) and discussing transfer planning (OR 2.14, 95% CI 1.30-3.52), 
adjusted for age and site of care.
CONCLUSION: Transition guide dissemination is a simple intervention associated 
with increased awareness among young people with rheumatic conditions and 
discussions with their care team about transition preparation. The learning 
collaborative model facilitated identification of several dissemination 
strategies adaptable to site-specific resources.

© 2024 The Author(s). ACR Open Rheumatology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/acr2.11753
PMID: 39381857