86. Nurs Crit Care. 2024 Oct 8. doi: 10.1111/nicc.13172. Online ahead of print.

Self-efficacy as a psychological resource in the management of stress suffered 
by ICU nurses during the COVID-19 pandemic: A prospective study on emotional 
exhaustion.

Gil-Almagro F(1)(2), Carmona-Monge FJ(3), García-Hedrera FJ(1), Peñacoba-Puente 
C(2).

Author information:
(1)Alcorcón Foundation University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Rey Juan Carlos University, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Santiago de Compostela University Hospital, Santiago de Compostela, A Coruña, 
Spain.

BACKGROUND: Intensive care unit (ICU) nurses have experienced a high degree of 
stress during the COVID-19 pandemic. While the literature on the consequences on 
emotional symptomatology is abundant, studies on the protective psychosocial 
variables that have contributed to buffering these consequences are scarcer.
AIM: This study analyses the role of self-efficacy as a protective personality 
trait in ICU nurses during the COVID-19 pandemic, using a moderated mediation 
model that begins with the stress and anxiety experienced at the onset of the 
pandemic and concludes with the emotional exhaustion experienced 6 months later.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective longitudinal study with two data collection periods 
during the COVID-19 pandemic: (1) from 5 May to 21 June 2020 and (2) a follow-up 
6 months after the state of alarm finalized (January-April 2021). These were 
both very stressful periods for ICU staff because of the COVID-19 pandemic. This 
study was conducted with 129 ICU nurses (a non-probabilistic convenience sample 
in the Spanish health care system). Socio-demographic, occupational and 
psychosocial variables (i.e. stress, anxiety, self-efficacy and emotional 
exhaustion) were assessed. Descriptive analyses, Pearson correlations, covariate 
analyses (i.e. Student's t-test, one-factor ANOVA) and moderated mediation 
analyses were carried out (SPSS PROCESS macro, model 7). STrengthening the 
Reporting of OBservational studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) reporting guidelines 
were followed.
RESULTS: It shows that the higher the self-efficacy score, the lower the effect 
of stress on anxiety (p < .001); likewise, the moderating role of self-efficacy 
was equally valid for the whole final model (F = 8.790, p < .001), showing 
self-efficacy to be a good buffer for emotional exhaustion derived from the 
stress suffered in the ICU.
CONCLUSIONS: Self-efficacy (i.e. the belief of being able to do certain tasks 
successfully) is shown to be a highly relevant trait to enhance among ICU nurses 
during the COVID-19 pandemic, allowing them to manage work stress effectively 
and thus buffering the development of anxiety in the short term and emotional 
exhaustion in the long term.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Our results point to the need to assess and take 
action on self-efficacy in ICU nurses in highly stressful situations such as the 
COVID-19 pandemic. As a psychological variable, self-efficacy refers to beliefs 
and therefore has to be trained by evidence-based psychological techniques, such 
as cognitive behavioural therapy. In addition, previous literature has pointed 
out that previous experience or specific training is an influential (although 
not a determining) factor in self-efficacy, so specialization for ICU nurses 
could also be considered.

© 2024 The Author(s). Nursing in Critical Care published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of British Association of Critical Care Nurses.

DOI: 10.1111/nicc.13172
PMID: 39380321