87. J Clin Psychol. 2024 Oct 8. doi: 10.1002/jclp.23746. Online ahead of print.

The influence of hope and optimism on trajectories of COVID-19 stress, health 
anxiety, and wellbeing during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Long LJ(1), Viana AG(2), Zvolensky MJ(3)(4)(5), Lu Q(6), Gallagher MW(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders, Department of Psychological & Brain 
Sciences, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)School of Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United 
States of America.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, United 
States of America.
(4)Department of Behavioral Science, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(5)HEALTH Institute, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of 
America.
(6)Department of Health Disparities Research, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(7)Texas Institute for Measurement, Evaluation, and Statistics, University of 
Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

INTRODUCTION: The COVID-19 pandemic posed a threat to public health and 
psychological functioning, with early studies documenting higher rates of 
psychopathology within the United States and globally. Hope and optimism promote 
adjustment and are associated with positive physical and mental health outcomes. 
Thus, individual differences in hope and optimism may also foster resilience 
during a global health crisis.
AIMS: The current study examined how hope and optimism influenced longitudinal 
health-focused distress and wellbeing during the pandemic.
METHODS: Data were collected from 788 American adults across three periods 
during Spring-Summer 2020 using MTurk. Latent growth curve modeling examined 
whether hope and optimism predicted COVID stress, health anxiety, and wellbeing 
trajectories.
RESULTS: COVID stress and health anxiety decreased after the onset of the 
pandemic, whereas wellbeing was stable. Individually, hope and optimism 
predicted lower initial COVID stress and health anxiety, along with greater 
initial wellbeing. When examining the combined influence of hope and optimism, 
optimism was more strongly related to health-focused distress, though both were 
strong predictors of wellbeing.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that Americans were resilient and positive 
expectancies, particularly optimism, predicted better initial adjustment to the 
early phases of the pandemic. Thus, positive expectancies appear to be 
protective during a global health crisis.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jclp.23746
PMID: 39380319