16. Indian J Med Res. 2024 Jun;159(6):585-600. doi: 10.25259/IJMR_1449_23.

Long COVID syndrome: An unfolding enigma.

Sharma SK(1), Mohan A(2), Upadhyay V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Jamia Hamdard Institute of Molecular 
Medicine, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Medicine, Sri Venkateswara Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Tirupati, India.

Post-acute sequelae of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 
(SARS-CoV-2) disease (COVID-19), called as long COVID syndrome, is a major 
global public health issue after recovery from COVID-19. The disease occurs in 
symptomatic patients irrespective of illness severity. The symptoms continue 
after four wk of recovery from acute illness and persist beyond three months. 
Risk factors for long COVID include older age, female gender, multiple 
co-morbidities including diabetes mellitus, prior chronic respiratory illnesses, 
hospitalized patients with severe disease, especially receiving assisted 
ventilation, high viral load, reactivation of Epstein Barr (EB) virus and human 
herpes virus 6 (HH6), circulating auto antibodies against various organs and 
type I interferon. The prevalence varies from 10 to 20 per cent, and most data 
have been reported from high-income countries. Any system can get involved in 
long COVID. The symptoms include fatigue, cognition impairment, cough and 
dyspnoea, anosmia, hair loss and diarrhoea, among others. While there are no 
laboratory tests for confirmation of diagnosis, reduced complement C7 complexes 
at six months, and a two-gene biomarker including FYN and SARS-CoV-2 antisense 
ribonucleic acid (RNA) are emerging as potentially useful biomarkers for long 
COVID. There should be no alternative disease to explain various symptoms. 
Vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 and early use of oral antiviral nirmatrelvir 
within the first five days in patients with acute mild disease having various 
risk factors for progression to severe disease help in preventing long COVID. 
Several clinical trials are underway for the treatment of long COVID and the 
results of these are eagerly awaited. Physical and mental rehabilitation at 
home, at community level or in the hospital setting as appropriate is essential 
in patients with long COVID.

DOI: 10.25259/IJMR_1449_23
PMID: 39382470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]