70. Can Commun Dis Rep. 2024 Oct 3;50(10):345-356. doi: 10.14745/ccdr.v50i10a03. 
eCollection 2024 Oct.

Mathematical modelling for pandemic preparedness in Canada: Learning from 
COVID-19.

Ogden NH(1), Acheson ES(1), Brown K(2)(3), Champredon D(1), Colijn C(4), Diener 
A(5), Dushoff J(6), Earn DJ(7), Gabriele-Rivet V(1), Gangbè M(1), Guillouzic 
S(8), Hennessy D(9), Hongoh V(1), Hurford A(10), Kanary L(1), Li M(1), Ng V(1), 
Otto SP(11), Papst I(1), Rees EE(1), Tuite A(3)(12), MacLeod MR(8), Murall 
CL(13), Waddell L(1), Wasfi R(1), Wolfson M(14).

Author information:
(1)Public Health Risk Sciences Division, National Microbiology Laboratory, 
Public Health Agency of Canada.
(2)Public Health Ontario, Toronto, ON.
(3)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON.
(4)Department of Mathematics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC.
(5)Health Policy Branch, Health Canada, Ottawa, ON.
(6)Department of Biology and Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious 
Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON.
(7)Department of Mathematics and Statistics and Michael G. DeGroote Institute 
for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON.
(8)Centre for Operational Research and Analysis, Defence Research and 
Development Canada, Department of National Defence, Ottawa, ON.
(9)Health Analysis Division, Analytical Studies and Modelling Branch, Statistics 
Canada, Ottawa, ON.
(10)Department of Biology and Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Memorial 
University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL.
(11)Department of Zoology and Biodiversity Research Centre, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC.
(12)Centre for Immunization Programs, Public Health Agency of Canada, Ottawa, 
ON.
(13)Public Health Genomics Division, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public 
Health Agency of Canada.
(14)Faculty of Medicine and Faculty of Law-Common Law, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, ON.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic underlined the need for pandemic planning but 
also brought into focus the use of mathematical modelling to support public 
health decisions. The types of models needed (compartment, agent-based, 
importation) are described. Best practices regarding biological realism 
(including the need for multidisciplinary expert advisors to modellers), model 
complexity, consideration of uncertainty and communications to decision-makers 
and the public are outlined.
METHODS: A narrative review was developed from the experiences of COVID-19 by 
members of the Public Health Agency of Canada External Modelling Network for 
Infectious Diseases (PHAC EMN-ID), a national community of practice on 
mathematical modelling of infectious diseases for public health.
RESULTS: Modelling can best support pandemic preparedness in two ways: 1) by 
modelling to support decisions on resource needs for likely future pandemics by 
estimating numbers of infections, hospitalized cases and cases needing intensive 
care, associated with epidemics of "hypothetical-yet-plausible" pandemic 
pathogens in Canada; and 2) by having ready-to-go modelling methods that can be 
readily adapted to the features of an emerging pandemic pathogen and used for 
long-range forecasting of the epidemic in Canada, as well as to explore 
scenarios to support public health decisions on the use of interventions.
CONCLUSION: There is a need for modelling expertise within public health 
organizations in Canada, linked to modellers in academia in a community of 
practice, within which relationships built outside of times of crisis can be 
applied to enhance modelling during public health emergencies. Key challenges to 
modelling for pandemic preparedness include the availability of linked public 
health, hospital and genomic data in Canada.

DOI: 10.14745/ccdr.v50i10a03
PMCID: PMC11460797
PMID: 39380801