25. Nanoscale. 2024 Oct 9. doi: 10.1039/d4nr02762k. Online ahead of print.

Multivalent nanobody engineering for enhanced physisorption and functional 
display on gold nanoparticles.

Ayrton JP(1)(2), Ho C(1)(2), Zhang H(2), Chudasama V(3), Frank S(2), Thomas 
MR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)London Centre for Nanotechnology, University College London, London, UK. 
michael.thomas@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Biochemical Engineering, University College London, London, UK. 
stefanie.frank@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University College London, London, UK.

The ease of expression and engineering of single domain antibodies, known as 
nanobodies, make them attractive alternatives to conventional antibodies in 
point-of-care diagnostics such as lateral flow assays. In lateral flow assays, 
gold nanoparticle bioconjugates serve as labels which display affinity molecules 
on the gold surface. While examples of nanobody gold nanoparticle bioconjugates 
exist, few utilise the simple one-step approach of physisorption owing to 
undesirable nanoparticle aggregation and loss of functionality. Here we show 
that engineering nanobodies into multivalent structures can significantly 
enhance their functionality when physisorbed onto gold nanoparticles. This 
approach enables resulting bioconjugates to withstand multiple processing steps 
required for long-term nanoparticle storage within lateral flow assays. 
Specifically, we show that the trivalent version of VHHV nanobody (VHH3) against 
the S1 protein of SARS-CoV-2 can be immobilised onto gold nanoparticles through 
passive adsorption. Unlike its monovalent and bivalent nanobody counterparts, 
using VHHV3 preserves nanoparticle stability under salt stress, blocking, 
washing, and freeze-drying conditions while maintaining picomolar sensitivity to 
the S1 protein. We anticipate that this facile strategy is a significant 
advancement towards the integration of nanobodies in lateral flow assay 
development.

DOI: 10.1039/d4nr02762k
PMID: 39382227