23. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 Oct 9:e0093224. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00932-24. Online
 ahead of print.

Correlation of patient symptoms with SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant viral loads in 
nasopharyngeal and saliva samples and their influence on the performance of 
rapid antigen testing.

Shiraishi K(1), Chong Y(2), Goto T(1), Ishimaru T(3), Shimono N(4), Ikematsu 
H(5), Akashi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Kyushu University Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences (The First Department of Internal Medicine), Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Immunology, Rheumatology, and Infectious Disease, 
Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Infectious diseases, Japanese Red Cross Fukuoka Hospital, 
Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Center for the Study of Global Infection, Kyushu University Hospital, 
Fukuoka, Japan.
(5)Ricerca Clinica Co., Fukuoka, Japan.

Evaluating SARS-CoV-2 viral loads in nasopharyngeal (NP) and saliva samples, 
factors affecting viral loads, and the performance of rapid antigen testing 
(RAT) have not been comprehensively conducted during SARS-CoV-2 Omicron 
epidemic. This prospective study included outpatients enrolled during Omicron 
variant period in Japan. Paired NP swab and saliva samples were collected to 
measure viral loads by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-qPCR). The correlation between viral loads and clinical symptoms 
was examined. The performance of an immunochromatography-based RAT kit was also 
assessed. A total of 153 patients tested within 3 days of symptom onset were 
included. The mean viral load was 5.60 log10 copies/test and 3.65 log10 
copies/test in NP and saliva samples, respectively, resulting in a significant 
difference (P < 0.0001). Fever over 37°C (axillary temperature) and total number 
of symptoms other than fever were identified as independent factors positively 
correlated with the viral loads in both NP and saliva samples. RAT sensitivity 
using NP and saliva samples was 92% and 68%, respectively, using positive 
RT-qPCR results as the reference. The sensitivity of RAT using NP and saliva 
samples was significantly higher in patients with fever ≥37°C and/or at least 
one symptom than in those with fever <37°C and/or no symptoms (97% vs 83% in NP 
swabs; 80% vs 50% in saliva). Distinct symptoms, including fever ≥37°C, may 
reflect high Omicron variant viral loads. Rapid antigen testing, not only using 
nasopharyngeal swabs but also using saliva, would be useful for COVID-19 
diagnosis as point-of-care testing, particularly for symptomatic patients.
IMPORTANCE: We examined nasopharyngeal and salivary viral loads using samples 
collected from outpatients with SARS-CoV-2 infection during the Omicron epidemic 
in Japan and explored the outpatient factors correlated with viral loads. In 
addition, we evaluated the performance of an authorized rapid antigen testing 
(RAT) kit using nasopharyngeal and saliva samples with RT-PCR testing as the 
reference. Intriguingly, a correlation between fever and other symptoms and 
SARS-CoV-2 viral loads in nasopharyngeal and saliva samples was observed based 
on one COVID-19 outpatient visit. RAT sensitivity was influenced by viral loads. 
Nevertheless, nasopharyngeal RAT is considered useful for SARS-CoV-2 
point-of-care diagnosis. In patients with distinct symptoms, including 
high-grade fever, salivary RAT could be a practical diagnostic tool because of 
the higher estimated viral loads. After the Omicron epidemic, outpatients with 
mild COVID-19 have become the main focus of diagnosis and treatment. Our study 
provides valuable information regarding the point-of-care diagnosis of these 
patients.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.00932-24
PMID: 39382283