Patel KS1, Anderson RJ1, Becker CB1, Taylor WC1, Liu AF1, Varshney AS2, Ali NB1, Nath BJ3, Pelletier SR4, Shields HM1, Osman NY1. Author information 1Department of Medicine, Brigham and Womens Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 2Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA. 3Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 4Office of Medical Education, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Contributed equally PURPOSE Coaching is a welldescribed means of providing realtime, actionable feedback to learners. We aimed to determine whether dual coaching from faculty physicians and real inpatients led to an improvement in historytaking skills of clerkship medical students. PATIENTS AND METHODS Expert faculty physicians on Zoom directly observed 13 clerkship medical students as they obtained a history from 26 real, hospitalized inpatients in person, after which students received immediate feedback from both the physician and the patient. Deidentified audiovideo recordings of all interviews were scored by independent judges using a previously validated clinical rating tool to assess for improvement in historytaking skills between the two interviews. Finally, all participants completed a survey with Likert scale questions and freetext prompts. RESULTS Students historytaking skills specifically in the domains of communication, medical knowledge and professional conduct on the validated rating tool, as evaluated by the independent judges, did not significantly improve between their first and second patient interviews. However, students rated the dual coaching as overwhelmingly positive average score of 1.43, with 1 being Excellent and 5 being Poor, with many appreciating the specificity and timeliness of the feedback. Patients also rated the experience very highly average score of 1.23, with 1 being Excellent and 5 being Poor, noting that they gained new insights into medical training. CONCLUSION Students value receiving immediate and specific feedback and real patients enjoy participating in the feedback process. Dual physicianpatient coaching is a unique way to incorporate more direct observation into undergraduate medical education curricula. 2024 Patel et al. DOI 10.2147AMEP.S472324 PMCID PMC11460274 PMID 39381803 Conflict of interest statement KSP reports consulting fees from Medlearnity, Inc. CBB receives compensation from Wolters Kluwer for authoring chapters for UpToDate. ASV reports consulting fees from Broadview Ventures, Hippocratic AI, and Baim Clinical Research Institute. All of these are outside of the submitted work. The authors report no other potential conflicts of interest in this work.