First, participation and representation of some actors, such as civil society, health experts, and marginalised groups, are insufficient in decisionmaking processes democratic deficit. Second, inadequate means to constrain power and poor transparency make it difficult to hold actors to account for their actions weak accountability mechanisms. Third, norms, rules, and decisionmaking procedures are often impervious to changing needs and can sustain entrenched power disparities, with adverse effects on the distribution of health institutional stickiness. Fourth, inadequate means exist at both national and global levels to protect health in global policymaking arenas outside of the health sector, such that health can be subordinated under other objectives inadequate policy space for health. Lastly, in a range of policymaking areas, there is a total or near absence of international institutions eg, treaties, funds, courts, and softer forms of regulation such as norms and guidelines to protect and promote health missing or nascent institutions. Recognising that major drivers of ill health lie beyond the control of national governments and, in many instances, also outside of the health sector, we assert that some of the root causes of health inequity must be addressed within global governance processes. For the continued success of the global health system, its initiatives must not be thwarted by political decisions in other arenas. Rather, global governance processes outside the health arena must be made to work better for health. The Commission calls for stronger crosssectoral global action for health. We propose for consideration a Multistakeholder Platform on Governance for Health, which would serve as a policy forum to provide space for diverse stakeholders to frame issues, set agendas, examine and debate policies in the making that would have an effect on health and health equity, and identify barriers and propose solutions for concrete policy processes. Additionally, we call for the independent monitoring of how global governance processes affect health equity to be institutionalised through an Independent Scientific Monitoring Panel and mandated health equity impact assessments within international organisations. The Commission also calls for measures to better harness the global political determinants of health. We call for strengthened use of human rights instruments for health, such as the Special Rapporteurs, and stronger sanctions against a broader range of violations by nonstate actors through the international judicial system. We recognise that global governance for health must be rooted in commitments to global solidarity and shared responsibility through rightsbased approaches and new frameworks for international financing that go beyond traditional development assistance, such as for research and social protection. We want to send a strong message to the international community and to all actors that exert influence in processes of global governance we must no longer regard health only as a technical biomedical issue, but acknowledge the need for global crosssectoral action and justice in our efforts to address health inequity. We are challenged to develop a public health approach that responds to the globalised world. The present global health crisis is not primarily one of disease, but of governance.1Kickbusch I Mapping the future of public health action on global health.Can J Public Health.