At issue is not only the legal basis underpinning the establishment of the court as such, but also the rules of staffing it with judges as well as compliance. So, crucially, the failure to comply with the rules of formation of the court is in itself a violation of Article 6 ECHR. 4 Acknowledging the criticism this caselaw received, the court painting in quite broad brush strokes Kosař and Leloup, 2022, it is important that ECtHR connects the rationale behind established by law with the essence of the preservation of democracy to ensure that the judicial organization in a democratic society does not depend on the discretion of the executive, but that it is regulated by law emanating from Parliament. 5 Three key elements of the established by law test flow from Ástráðsson 6 1 objectively and genuinely identifiable breach of domestic law 2 the breaches should be fundamental to the procedure and 3 availability of suitable judicial review based on Convention standards. This standard has been applied in countless cases against Poland, resulting in the finding of significant violations in the cases of outright unlawfully appointed judges of the Constitutional Tribunal 7 see GrabowskaMoroz, 2021 and the Supreme Court of Poland, including, especially, the Disciplinary Chamber 8 but also other chambers, as long as they include individuals who were appointed by the reformed National Council of the Judiciary NCJ, which was established, to have the purpose of undermining the independence of the Polish judiciary 9 and is thus an institution that cannot appoint members to any tribunal established by law ŚledzińskaSimon, 2018. 10 For decades before the advent of the Article 191 TEU caselaw starting with Portuguese Judges Pech and Kochenov, 2021 that gave CJEU broad jurisdiction over the national judiciaries, the main vehicle for the CJEU to deal with the whole array of issues pertaining to judicial independence lawful composition and established by law requirements was Article 267 TFEU. 11 CJEUs determination of the meaning of court or tribunal in the context of the preliminary reference procedure has been a pillar of EU law since the dawn of integration Broberg and Fenger, 2021. The core idea was inclusivity and control. The Court invited as many interlocutors as possible to establish vibrant judicial dialogue Eeckhout, 2015, while at the same time keeping the right to determine what court or tribunal meant. As a result, the criterion of independence was such that even bodies not recognized as courts and inserted within the administrative structures of the Member States were eligible and encouraged to make references Broberg, 2009, p. 221. The basic standard to assess all the bodies qualifying to use the preliminary rulings, although criticised for example Tridimas, 2003, p. 30, was set out with clarity since the early days of European integration, demanding that the body is established by law, permanent, enjoying compulsory jurisdiction, inter partes procedure, applying rules of law and is independent. 12 Pech and Platon 2018, p. 1942 foresaw potential conflicts between the permissive paradigm espoused by this caselaw and the more demanding and rightly so requirements of Article 19 TEU following Portuguese Judges. Banco de Santander SA, 13 upgraded the meaning of court or tribunal by reinforcing the minimal independence requirement a body where irremovability of members is not strictly guaranteed cannot meet Article 267 TFEU standard para. 67.