Normative Consensus and Contentious Practice Challenges to Universalism in International Human Rights Courts Courtney Hillebrecht bio I. INTRODUCTION In 2015 the Russian Constitutional Court announced that it would review all of the European Court of Human Rights ECHR rulings against Russia for their constitutionality.1 This decision, which both the Duma and the Kremlin supported, underscored a fundamental disagreement between Russia and the ECHR about both the substance of human rights norms and the ways in which disagreements about human rights can and should be resolved. Russia has been a member of the Council of Europe since 1996 and agreed to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the ECHR in 1998. Russian citizens regularly seek recourse at the ECHR and Russia even complies with many of the Courts demands to pay financial reparations to victims. And yet, Russias prolonged tensions with the ECHR are textbook examples of the End Page 190 persistent, unresolved disputes at the center of the promotion and adjudication of universal human rights. Russias relationship with the ECHR suggests that underneath the façade of the institutionalization and judicialization of human rights remain fundamental divides about which rights count, and if and how those divides should be bridged. Simply engineering a different court or judicial process cannot ameliorate Russias contentious relationship with the ECHR. Instead, as we can learn from Reza Afsharis long history of grappling with these inconsistencies in the international human rights regime, the problem runs much deeper than institutional design they cannot be easily resolved. In his 2007 Human Rights Quarterly article titled On Historiography of Human Rights, Afshari begins with an observation about a related fundamental inconsistency in the historiography of the international human rights regime. He writes One of the main issues that the current historiography has to grapple with is the apparent disparity between the oftencelebrated normative global achievements in codifying human rights values among the UN member states and the oftenlamented failures to enforce them.