eCollection 2024 Oct. An innovative tool to prioritize the assessment of investigational COVID19 therapeutics A pilot project. Béïque L1, Clarke S1, Azad M1, Sarwar E1, GaleRowe M1, Sabourin S1, Marinsky C1, Arthur J1. Author information 1Infectious Diseases and Vaccination Programs Branch, Public Health Agency of Canada, Ottawa, ON. BACKGROUND As the COVID19 pandemic unfolded, hundreds of investigational COVID19 therapeutics emerged. Maintaining situational awareness of this extensive and rapidly evolving therapeutic landscape represented an unprecedented challenge for the Public Health Agency of Canada, as it worked to promote and protect the health of Canadians. A tool to triage and prioritize the assessment of these therapeutics was needed. METHODS The objective was to develop and conduct an initial validation of a tool to identify investigational COVID19 therapeutics for further review based on an efficient preliminary assessment, using a systematic and reliable process that would be practical to validate, implement and update. Phase 1 of this pilot project consisted of a literature search to identify existing COVID19 therapeutic assessment prioritization tools, development of the Rapid Scoring Tool RST and initial validation of the tool. RESULTS No tools designed to rank investigational COVID19 therapeutics for the purpose of prioritizing their assessment were identified. However, a few publications provided criteria to consider and therapeutic ranking methods, which helped shape the development of the RST. The RST included eight criteria and several descriptors characteristics. A universal characteristic scoring scale from 10 to 10 was developed. The sum of all the characteristic scores yielded an overall benefit score for each therapeutic. The RST appropriately ranked therapeutics using a systematic, reliable and practical approach. CONCLUSION Phase 1 was successfully completed. The RST presents several distinct aspects compared with other tools, including its scoring scale and method, and capacity to factor in incomplete or pending information. It is anticipated that the framework used for the RST will lend itself to use in other dynamic situations involving many interventions. DOI 10.14745ccdr.v50i10a04 PMCID PMC11460842 PMID 39380802 Conflict of interest statement Competing interests None.