While Switzerland is not a member state of the European Union EU, it is strongly influenced by the European integration process. Since the referendum on the European Economic Area EEA in 1992, the relationship with the EU has been at the top of the political agenda, and Swiss citizens have been repeatedly asked to vote on EUrelated issues.1 Switzerlands European policy has remained a highly controversial issue all along, and it has strongly contributed to the redefinition of the cleavage structure and to changes in electoral competition and party system Kriesi et al. 2008. During the last two decades, Switzerland has concluded more than 15 bilateral agreements in various policy fields. It has thus reached a level of integration that can be characterized as customized quasimembership Kriesi and Trechsel 2008 189. This, in turn, has had farreaching consequences at the domestic level. Switzerland is, therefore, a case worth considering for scholars interested in the Europeanization of policymaking. Not surprisingly, then, there are countless contributions on the impact of EUrelated factors on Swiss politics and policy outputs for an overview see Fischer 2007. Twenty years after the popular rejection of the EEA, it is time to take stock of these contributions and to make their findings available to a wider audience. What do we know about the Europeanization of Swiss policymaking? This is the opening question of this debate. The international literature on Europeanization has demonstrated a strong preference for qualitative studies over quantitative studies Exadaktylos and Radaelli 2012b. This also holds for Switzerland. A number of smallN studies2 have provided insights into the effects on Swiss decisionmaking processes and on related power relations, conflict and coalition among domestic actors. Legal scholars, for their part, have discussed how and to which extent EU norms influence the Swiss legal order Epiney 2009. LargeN studies are scarcer, and they have mainly focused on legislation. More specifically, authors have adopted a quantitative approach to measure how much Swiss legislation is Europeanized, and to establish causal links between EU factors and domestic policies Arbia 2008, Gava and Varone 2012, Jenni 2013, Kohler 2009, Linder et al. 2009, Mallepell 1999. While Switzerland is strongly integrated in the EU, it still stands apart as a nonEU and nonEEA country. In a comparative perspective, it thus offers variation on a crucial institutional variable, namely nonmembership to these two European supranational organizations. Switzerland appears consequently as a valuable control case for crossnational inquiries that aim at identifying the effects of the EU on national political systems and outcomes Bartle 2006, Fontana et al. 2008, Haverland 2007, LeviFaur 2004. Differences in the extent of Europeanization within the country, with some policy fields strongly affected and others largely immune from EUdriven influence, further motivate the comparison of Europeanization effects across policy fields in Switzerland e.g. Papadopoulos 2008, Sciarini et al. 2004. In the EU, there is a strong preference for studying the policy effects of Europeanization, whereas there is definitely less intellectual appetite for appraising the politics dimension Exadaktylos and Radaelli 2012a 24. Switzerland tends to depart in that respect as several studies have dealt with decisionmaking processes and have focused on the related politics and, to some extent, polity dimensions. Against this background, the purpose of this Debate is threefold. First, we wish to provide scholars with the opportunity to present and wrap up the main results of their work on Europeanization. Second, we wish to invite them to exchange their respective findings, and to engage in a fruitful dialogue regarding which theoretical and empirical lessons can be drawn from the existing literature, and where we should go from there. Third, we wish to give nonSwiss scholars the opportunity to comment on the Swiss literature, to highlight its strengths and weaknesses in a comparative perspective, and to put forward recommendations for the future. To this end, we have asked contributors to this Debate to address the four following questions Not all contributors were able to answer these four questions. However, for the sake of consistency we thought it was worth starting with an ambitious purpose and asking contributors to do their best to address the same set of questions. NonSwiss scholars were then invited to react and to elaborate on the insights provided by the Swiss contributors.