Carrell D. Cobo A. Meseguer M. Rubio C. Smith G.D. Optimizing the culture environment and embryo manipulation to help maintain embryo developmental potential.Fertil Steril. 2016 105 571587Abstract Full Text Full Text PDF PubMed Scopus 51 Google Scholar, have become a fundamental part of providing assisted reproductive technology ART procedures to patients worldwide 6Alikani M. Parmegiani L. Human reproductive cell cryopreservation, storage, handling, and transport risks and risk management.Semin Reprod Med. 2018 36 265272Crossref PubMed Scopus 7 Google Scholar. However, the challenges and concerns accompanying all new technologies also apply to the cryopreservation of human reproductive tissue. There are inherent benefits and risks, not only associated with the freezing and thawing process itself but also involving actual and potential legal rights and obligations. There is no denying that gamete sperm and egg and embryo freezing have many benefits to patients, including preserving fertility for those facing fertilitycompromising medical treatment, optimizing pregnancy success by reducing ovarian hyperstimulation, decreasing the incidence of multiple pregnancies by storing supernumerary embryos for later use, decreasing cost and medical risk of subsequent IVF cycles, increasing the availability of donor gametes and embryos, and allowing time for genetic testing of embryos through preimplantation genetic testing 7Bosch E. De Vos M. Humaidan P. The future of cryopreservation in assisted reproductive technologies.Front Endocrinol. 2020 11 67Crossref PubMed Scopus 21 Google Scholar. Some researchers have also shown that embryo freezing has increased ongoing pregnancy rates and decreased the cost per live birth 8Van Der Westerlaken L, Naaktgeboren N. Contribution of embryo cryopreservation to the pregnancydelivery rates in an IVFICSI programme with the single embryo transfer. Presented at the 19th Annual Meeting of the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology, Madrid, Spain, June 2003.Google Scholar. However, each of these indications for freezing raises the practical questions of how best to store, transport, and, ultimately, dispose of extraneous gametes and embryos while minimizing the risks that providing cryopreservation imposes on the healthcare provider and the fertility clinic. Clearly, the extensive use of cryopreservation in reproductive medicine has outpaced knowledge of the consequences of its use 9Bankowski B.J.