Peculiarities of criminal liability for this type of shadow process are considered. The direct definition of the concept of trafficking in human beings is characterized and its characteristic varieties are considered. The current state of legislation regarding this problem is analyzed. The regulatory support for countering this negative phenomenon, as well as the institutional support for countering it, are being studied. The criminal liability for this illegal action has been specified. And also the issue of human trafficking as a form of organized criminal activity is separately investigated. The chapter by Volodymіr Manhora and Inna Kahlіak is devoted to the topic of business contracts in modern social and legal conditions. The expediency of the classification of business contracts has been determined. Their current distribution was carried out in order to determine the place of this or that contract in the general system of economic and legal relations, and their main functional purpose was clarified. The newest form of economic contracts electronic ones is characterized. It has been established that the division of this type of contracts into types can be carried out according to various qualification criteria, which is due to the continuous evolution of economic turnover. Creation of a harmonious and effective system of economic legislation is one of the most important areas of development of the legal system of Ukraine in the context of adaptation to the legislation of the European Union. According to Taisa Tomlіaks scientific research, modern evidence of judicial practice of national courts and the European Court of Human Rights proves that judicial bodies have the largest number of cases related to the protection of the rights, freedoms and best interests of the child. It is the judicial bodies that protect the best interests of children, therefore, such a judicial mechanism must be effective and efficient. The mechanism of the legal issue under consideration has its own specifics. Considering the special status of the child as a vulnerable category and the broader concept of the best interests of the child than the rights of the child in general, this issue requires special protection and proper legal protection. Yurii Demіanchuk and Oksana Semenіuk consider the issue of the normative and legal basis of the prevention of corruption in Ukraine in relation to the requirements of the European Union. As a method of scientific research, it plays an extremely important role in learning the essence of social phenomena and processes. The expediency of the raised topic is stated as one of the universal methods in the plan of transforming the future, because it is impossible to carry out social transformations without having a proper innovative project. The considered legal model of combating corruption motivates the desire to get into power structures for reasons of personal safety and impunity. Therefore, it includes the processes of the degradation of power and its consistent corruption in Ukraine to the requirements of the European Union. According to Andriі Pravdіuk, information is a productive force and a commodity, simultaneously being a means of protection and attack in defense of state, corporate and personal interests of subjects of power relations. Starting from the time of the first attempts to scientifically understand the concept, essence and meaning of information in society, the problem of the right to access to information has been the object of considerable attention of representatives of various scientific fields historical, sociopsychological, philosophical, legal, technical, etc. However, despite the different level of coverage of the problem from the point of view of informativeness and source support, they do not exhaust the topic of research, but on the contrary, in the modern conditions of the formation of the national and global information space, they enrich and update it. The purpose of Irіna Skichkos research is to analyze the state of adaptation of the legislation of Ukraine to the legislation of the European Union in the context of the actually implemented and planned. The author emphasizes that despite Ukraines active implementation of the Association Agreement between Ukraine on the one hand, and the European Union, the European Atomic Energy Community and their member states on the other, the application for Ukraines membership in the European Union was submitted only during a fullscale military intrusion. This situation is explained by the large amount of unfinished rulemaking work to adapt Ukrainian legislation to European legislation. Even despite the constant obstacles on the way to adaptation, as of February 2023, Ukraine has fulfilled 72 of the obligations stipulated in the Association Agreement with the European Union. Considering the above, it is relevant to review the current and future steps taken regarding this adaptation. Oleksandr Pohuliaiev makes an attempt to analyze the historical process of unification of legal institutions of European states. According to the author, this process can serve as an example for Ukraine and other countries that intend to join the European Union. Treaties regulating relations between Ukraine and the EU have been reviewed. Ukraines fulfillment of requirements for deepened political and legal integration into the European family is analyzed.