At the same time, the number of unemployed workers is soaring. In 2012, global unemployment rose to 1973 million, 284 million higher than in 2007. Of those who work, 27 854 million people attempt to survive on less than US2 per day. More than 60 of workers in southeast Asia and subSaharan Africa earn less than 2 per day.7ILOWorld of work report 2013 repairing the economic and social fabric. International Labour Organization, Geneva2013Google ScholarMany of the 300 million Indigenous people face discrimination, which hinders them from meeting their daily needs and voicing their claims.8Hall G Patrinos HA Indigenous peoples, poverty, and development. Cambridge University Press, New York2012Crossref Scopus 80 Google Scholar Girls and women face barriers to access education and secure employment compared with boys and men,9UNThe Millennium Development Goals report. United Nations, New York2012Google Scholar and women worldwide still face inequalities with respect to reproductive and sexual health rights.10Fonn S Sundari Ravindran TKThe macroeconomic environment and sexual and reproductive health a review of trends over the last 30 years.Reprod Health Matters. 2011 19 1125Summary Full Text Full Text PDF PubMed Scopus 9 Google Scholar These barriers diminish their control over their own life circumstances. Although the poorest population groups in the poorest countries are left with the heaviest burden of health risks and disease, the fact that peoples life chances differ so widely is not simply a problem of poverty, but one of socioeconomic inequality. The differences in health manifest themselves as gradients across societies, with physical and mental ills steeply increasing for each step down the social ladder, along with other healthrelated outcomes such as violence, drug misuse, depression, obesity, and child wellbeing.11Wilkinson R Pickett K The spirit level why equality is better for everyone. Penguin Books, London2010Google Scholar It is now well established that the more unequal the society, the worse the outcomes for allincluding those at the top.11Wilkinson R Pickett K The spirit level why equality is better for everyone. Penguin Books, London2010Google Scholar, 12Stiglitz J The price of inequality. Penguin Books, New York2012Google Scholar The WHO Commission on Social Determinants of Health recognised that societal inequalities skew the distribution of health. It concluded that social norms, policies, and practices that tolerate or actually promote unfair distribution of, and access to, power, wealth, and other necessary social resources create systematic inequalities in daily living conditions.13Commission on Social Determinants of HealthClosing the gap in a generation health equity through action on the social determinants of health. Final report of the Commission on Social Determinants of Health. World Health Organization, Geneva2008Google Scholar In a groundbreaking analysis, the report showed how daily living conditions make a major difference to peoples life chances. These conditions include safe housing and cohesive communities, access to healthy food and basic health care, decent work, and safe working conditions.