Johns, NL. 11Department of Zoology and Biodiversity Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC. 12Centre for Immunization Programs, Public Health Agency of Canada, Ottawa, ON. 13Public Health Genomics Division, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canada. 14Faculty of Medicine and Faculty of LawCommon Law, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON. BACKGROUND The COVID19 pandemic underlined the need for pandemic planning but also brought into focus the use of mathematical modelling to support public health decisions. The types of models needed compartment, agentbased, importation are described. Best practices regarding biological realism including the need for multidisciplinary expert advisors to modellers, model complexity, consideration of uncertainty and communications to decisionmakers and the public are outlined. METHODS A narrative review was developed from the experiences of COVID19 by members of the Public Health Agency of Canada External Modelling Network for Infectious Diseases PHAC EMNID, a national community of practice on mathematical modelling of infectious diseases for public health. RESULTS Modelling can best support pandemic preparedness in two ways 1 by modelling to support decisions on resource needs for likely future pandemics by estimating numbers of infections, hospitalized cases and cases needing intensive care, associated with epidemics of hypotheticalyetplausible pandemic pathogens in Canada and 2 by having readytogo modelling methods that can be readily adapted to the features of an emerging pandemic pathogen and used for longrange forecasting of the epidemic in Canada, as well as to explore scenarios to support public health decisions on the use of interventions. CONCLUSION There is a need for modelling expertise within public health organizations in Canada, linked to modellers in academia in a community of practice, within which relationships built outside of times of crisis can be applied to enhance modelling during public health emergencies. Key challenges to modelling for pandemic preparedness include the availability of linked public health, hospital and genomic data in Canada. DOI 10.14745ccdr.v50i10a03 PMCID PMC11460797 PMID 39380801