Nor, moreover, do critical theorists resort to freestanding normative standards that are decoupled from the perspectives of those who participate in a particular individual or collective practice. Characteristically their focus is on reconstructing and then interrogating the norms and assumptions that inhere in widely accepted practices and institutions. The most comprehensive generalizing reconstruction of the selfunderstanding on which historically known democratic constitutions and declarations of rights are necessarily based Maus, 1995, p. 839 is Jürgen Habermas Between Facts and Norms, which identifies as the backbone of any existing democracy a system of rights that are meant to secure citizens public and private autonomy Habermas, 1992, pp. 151165. This understanding of democracy can fruitfully inform the present inquiry. Habermas approach is to start with an analysis of the practice of democratic constitutionmaking. A focus on the presuppositions that participants in that practice must unavoidably make in order for the practice to make sense to them is intended to unveil that constitutional democracy fundamentally represents an enterprise of free and equal citizens who govern themselves through the medium of positive law Patberg, 2017, p. 54. This insight, Habermas 1992, p. 668 suggests, may be reformulated as a guiding question for every constitutionmaker what rights must citizens mutually grant one another if they decide to constitute themselves as a voluntary association of legal consociates and legitimately to regulate their living together by means of positive law?5 Habermas answers that question by imagining a hypothetical constitutional assembly, in which a group of founders deliberates on the preconditions of legally institutionalized selflegislation. The first conclusion the hypothetical founders arrive at is that the chosen medium of positive law requires them to grant each citizen the status of the bearer of subjective rights. This leads them to establish three categories of basic rights iiii that, taken together, constitute an association of legal consociates Patberg, 2017, p. 54. In addition, the imagined founders recognize that a category of political rights is necessary to enable citizens to become authors of the law, instead of being merely passive recipients of the law iv. Taken together, this produces the system of rights basic rights whatever their concrete content that result from the autonomous elaboration of the right to the greatest possible measure of equal individual freedom of action for each person basic rights whatever their concrete content that result from the autonomous elaboration of the status of a member in a voluntary association of legal consociates basic rights whatever their concrete content that result from the autonomous elaboration of each individuals right to equal protection under the law, that is, that result from the actionability of individual rights basic rights whatever their concrete content that emerge from the autonomous elaboration of the right to an equal opportunity to participate in political lawgiving Habermas, 2001, p. 777.6 That the substantive content of these sets of rights is not specified is deliberate. The system of rights is an abstract framework for positive democratic constitutional law that, as Ingeborg Maus puts it, is intended to leave room for the political autonomy of constitutional lawmaking and lawgiving citizens who first develop rights from their own vantage point, bring them historically to consciousness, and enact them into positive law also see Habermas, 1992, pp. 160162 Habermas, 1996, p. 90. It is thus up to the citizens of realexisting democracies or their representatives to spell out the concrete content of their basic rights, as well as establish the central institutional components that sustain their constitutional order. None of these things, the thought goes, should be determined from the observerperspective the theorist. The attractiveness of this approach lies in part in its minimalism. It does not insist on the presence of particular political institutions nor does it stipulate any substantive fundamental rights that a polity must secure if is to count as democratic. As such, the four sets of basic rights can be translated into multiple varieties of democratic constitutionalism. They are just as compatible with democracies that reign in majority rule through legal checks as with systems of collective selfrule that lack such constraints. So long as citizens rights to an equal opportunity to participate in political law giving are protected in other ways,7 Habermas system of basic rights does not even require that democracies hold elections. Clearly, then, it can satisfy desideratum 3. No particular model of democracy is implicitly assumed as normative ideal. Less straightforward is the question of whether Habermas approach can also satisfy the rather demanding desideratum 2. It is after all parasitic on a broader theory of progressive social evolution that positions Western modernity as the outcome of moralpractical learning see, most notably, Habermas, 1981. Learning processes, on this line of thinking, were set in motion by the Enlightenment and the democratic revolutions of the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In Habermas own words 2019, p. 737, these events introduced a new tension Spannungsbogen between norms and reality into social reality itself, since the rights that were framed as universal by the emerging republican constitutions were first only enjoyed by a small privileged minority. However, those who sought to criticize lacking social and political justice were now in a position to make appeals to the nonrealised normative content of nonsaturated basic rights and claims to justice Habermas, 2019, p. 737. Eventually, these appeals, and the episodes of resistance that sometimes accompanied them, encouraged the sort of collective moral learning that led to the gradual expansion and institutionalization of equal freedoms to universal suffrage, human rights, and so on. Though Habermas is careful not to frame those learning processes in strongly linear terms see Habermas, 2019, p. 737, critics like Amy Allen 2016, p. 9 have rightly worried that a certain vestigial remnant of the traditional philosophy of history remains in the notions of sociocultural development, historical learning, and moralpolitical progress that inform Habermass conception of modernity. In other words, Habermas remains committed to a core understanding of social progress, such that if a society can be said to have progressed then this will be because that society followed a certain developmental, unidirectional, and cumulative moralpolitical learning process. As far as the system of rights is concerned, the potential problem is twofold. On the one hand, being pegged to what is an avowedly Eurocentric theory of modernity, in which the motor of progress are moralpractical learning processes instigated by the Enlightenment, it may be seen as perhaps unintentionally devaluing alternative developmental paths Allen, 2016, p. 17.