Why making elections less competitive always and necessarily implies a deterioration of democratic quality, or how a democracys political institutions should look to begin with, is not addressed. Instead, what democracy requires is treated as fairly obvious and straightforward. The fact that there exists a great variety of democratic ideals that could plausibly be invoked, none of which are value neutral or obvious choices, tends to be sidelined for a critical discussion of this practice in political science, see Sabl, 2015. If one part of the literature on democratic backsliding underdetermines the concept by treating certain features of democracy as stable, obvious, and not in need of further discussion, there are numerous more specific case studies of democratic backsliding that offer rich and detailed discussions of what it means to erode a democracy. For example, research on the Hungarian and Polish governments recent attempts at disabling Bánkuti et al., 2012 their countries constitutions avowedly treat a particular conception of liberal democracy with strong independent constitutional courts as definitive normative standard e.g., Bugaric, 2016 Hillion, 2016 Kelemen, 2017 Kochenov, 2014 Müller, 2015 Scheppele, 2019 Wolkenstein, 2022. As JanWerner Müller 2015, p. 152 notes, this form of constrained democracy was the preferred conception of the architects of the postwar West European order and underpins the democratic constitution of the European Union. It is interpreted to be implied in Article 2 TEU, which Hungary and Poland are said to be breaching with their illiberal attacks on constitutional courts in particular CastilloOrtiz, 2019. In short, democratic backsliding in Hungary and Poland equals sliding away from the constrained conception of democracy that defines the Unions wider constitutional selfunderstanding. Unfortunately, such a contextspecific understanding of democracy is only of limited use for the task of clarifying the meaning of democratic backsliding. For even if it makes some sense to say that attacks on independent constitutional courts are a core conceptual feature of democratic backsliding within the EU, given the conception of democracy the EU is based on, it would be odd to say that attacks on independent constitutional courts are a core conceptual feature of democratic backsliding as such, that is, in any given context. Democracies come in many different forms with significant variations in their institutional architecture, and some supposedly wellfunctioning democracies have no or very weak constitutional courts e.g., the Scandinavian countries see Larsen, 2021 Wind, 2010.2 Arguably a useful general account of democratic backsliding must be able to explain deteriorations of democracy in such nonconstrained democracies, too. The same problem of overdetermination plagues recent attempts to measure democratic backsliding using a largescale quality of democracy datasets, such as the Varieties of Democracy Project VDem. Without denying the value of this impressive project, its modelbased definition of democracy as electoral democracy plus three additional components the rule of law ensuring respect for civil liberties, judicial constraints on the executive branch, and legislative checks and oversight of the executive Mechkova et al., 2017, p. 162, which is merely stipulated rather than defended, also runs the risk of overgeneralizing the place and function of particular idealtypical democracysustaining institutions this is a consequence of thinking about democracy in terms of particular models of democracy, see Warren, 2017 on this issue in connection with VDem in particular, see Dryzek, 2016, p. 362. For instance, the quite central assumption that more judicial checks on legislative processes indicate better democracy appears rash, not least because there exist wellfunctioning democracies with very few judicial checks, as noted before. Identifying democracy with very specific institutional features not only blinds us to the considerable institutional variations across democracies. Perhaps even more importantly, it also holds the risk of making use lose track of what political institutions should actually achieve within a democratic political system. As Warren 2017, pp. 4041 argues, once we step back and ask that question, it often turns out that the institutions or practices that particular models of democracy foreground as definitive of democracy as such, have clear strengths and limitations. If we treat their mere existence and stability across time as a primary normative yardstick, we may well miss the bigger, qualitative picture of whether those institutions perform their supposed functions in a satisfying fashion.3 That is, we may grow insensitive to the question of whether they fulfill the function ascribed to them in a way that sustains or enhances democracy at the level of the democratic system. 2 HISTORY, PROGRESS, TELEOLOGY There are two primary takeaways from the prior section. First, a theoretically satisfying account of democratic backsliding must be able to explain why particular developments e.g., making elections less competitive without entirely undermining the electoral mechanism constitute a degeneration of democracy. Second, a theoretically satisfying account of democratic backsliding must be able to explain this without asserting a particular normative model of democracy that frames specific institutional features of democracy as definitive components of any wellfunctioning democracy. Another issue that needs handling concerns the question of whether we need to make specific theoretical assumptions about history in general and the historical development of democracy in particular when we speak of democratic backsliding. To better understand what is at stake, consider first that the notion of backsliding implies directionality moving backward, from a desirable, higher state of development to a prior, lower state. This meaning has been inscribed into the term since its first usage in the English language. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the verb to backslide was first used in a published work in 1581, in the context of the sixteenth century religious dispute between the English Latinist Walter Haddon and the Portuguese bishop Jerome Osorio de Fonseca. The specific phrase in which it was usedi.e., the onely righteousnesse of Fayth, from whence they were backslyden is indicative of the justmentioned connotation of moving back to a lower, earlier state of moral development. The adjective backsliding, in turn, makes its first appearance in the King James Bible of 1611 and then more than 200 years later, in Sir Walter Scotts 1816 novel The Tale of Old Mortality, where Scott speaks of a backsliding pastor, that has forsaken the strict path. Again, backsliding is invoked to describe a regress into an earlier state of amorality or sin. This normative connotation is to some extent retained in the term democratic backsliding. Bermeo 2016, p. 6 acknowledges this when she notes that When linked with the word democratic, the terms current secular meaning is in keeping with its origins in that it denotes a willful turning away from an ideal. However, there is an important difference between the early modern, religious use of backsliding or to backslide and the contemporary secular notion of democratic backsliding. Whereas the former is based on a specifically Christian ideal of striving toward spiritual maturity and perfection according to which No one is perfect who does not strive for further perfection Koselleck, 2010, p. 172, the latter at least implicitly turns upon the kinds of Enlightenment philosophies that see history as gravitating towards evergreater emancipation see, paradigmatically, Hegel, 1986.4 The assumption appears to be that the theory and practice of democracy have over the course of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries progressively evolved to become more inclusive and democratic, culminating in as one wellknown commentator put it the universalization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government Fukuyama, 1989, p. 4. Accordingly, any departure from this final type of regime e.g., making it more illiberal, as Viktor Orbán and his party tried to do equals regresssliding backward. There are at least two wellknown problems with such developmental views of history. For one thing, many of their most common variations adopt an implausibly teleological vision of progress that casts history as moving unidirectionally toward a predetermined goal. As Buchanan and Powell 2018, p. 7 put it, however, acknowledging the bloodbaths of the twentieth and early twentyfirst century requires abandoning linear conceptions of progress that imply continuous progress or at least rule out major regressions. Theodor W.