Whitney J.B. VerMilyea M.D. Jones A. Aguirre M. et al.Comprehensive assessment of cryogenic storage risk and quality management concerns best practice guidelines for ART labs.J Assist Reprod Genetics. 2019 36 514Crossref PubMed Scopus 16 Google Scholar. General items to be included in the development of policies to manage cryostorage risk include the followingIdentifying the applicable cryostorage law, regulation, or judicial outcome and appropriate professional guidelines relevant to the clinics geographic area, and incorporating any requirements into practice.Surveying the location of cryopreservation storage units to evaluate for accessibility, safety, and security for maintaining tank integrity and temperature uniformity, which is necessary to protect cryopreserved material and staff.Ensuring that liquid or vapor nitrogen tanks are in good condition, operational, and stored properly in a wellventilated area. Oxygen monitors are strongly recommended.Developing routine cryopreservation equipment and tank management processes to include regular equipment and tank inspection, as well as repair and replacement based on manufacturers guidelines and standard industry usage.Installing locking and electronic monitoring systems on all cryopreservation storage tanks. This should include appropriate monitoring probe placement within the tanks, multiple alarm notification pathways, and backup energy supplies i.e., generators or batteries.Maintaining executed cryopreservation agreements with depositors that address cryopreservation processes, location and duration of storage, storage fees, depositors obligation to maintain contact, offsite transfer permission if applicable, and clear final disposition instructions.Developing protocols to reduce specimen loss during inventory e.g., consider automated identification and contamination during process and storage e.g., consider sterilization of liquid nitrogen and universal precautions.Addressing emergency and disaster responses, including staff safety, availability of first aid, cryostorage tank security, backup facilities, processes for closure andor movement of cryopreserved gametes and embryos to alternative locations as needed.Initial and periodic mandatory training of all embryology and andrology personnel on cryopreservation and cryostorage processes, policies, and procedures. As the world economy becomes more global, so does reproductive care. Domestic and international movement of gametes and embryos are seen every day as patients relocate or move their care to different clinics both within and outside their home countries. Prompted by reasons from access to better care and more services to removing legal barriers and improving availability of donors or surrogates to lowering costs, a recent review of crossborder reproductive care showed an upward trend of people traveling outside their home countries for ART treatments 33Salama M. Isachenko V. Isachenko E. Rahimi G. Mallmann P. Westphal L.M. et al.Cross border reproductive care CBRC a growing global phenomenon with multidimensional implications a systematic and critical review.J Assist Reprod Genetics. 2018 35 12771288Crossref PubMed Scopus 31 Google Scholar. In addition, more fertility clinics are opting for offsite storage because of space constraints, cost factors, or avoidance of final disposition risks, and the minimal data available show little detriment to survival, implantation, and pregnancy outcomes 34Senn S, Nehchiri F, Artac R, Dangcil M, Rabara F, Dasig D, Shipping cryopreserved embryos to longterm storage. Abstract presented at the annual meeting of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, October 19, 2009 Atlanta, Georgia.Google Scholar. As reproductive care travels, so will cryopreserved gametes and embryos, and the regulations and best practices for getting cryopreserved material safely from point A to point B will be tested. Transporting human tissue, including cryopreserved gametes and embryos, has become a growing business. Today, a quick internet search results in a long list of commercial businesses involved in the routine transport of gametes and embryos from state to state and across the world. However, the outcome of an early legal tussle over I want to move my embryos to California 35York v. Jones. 717 F. Suppl. 421 E.D. Va. 1989.Google Scholar stands to remind us that patients have a say in where their gametes and embryos will be stored or used. That does not necessarily mean that the transport is risk free or that the law of the intended transporting or receiving entitycountry allows such transfer. A serious consideration is the mode and method of gamete and embryo transport. Although commercial transport websites imply that moving embryos is relatively risk free 36Made in the US SurrogacyCan I transport frozen embryos?.httpsmadeintheusasurrogacy.comcanitransportfrozenembryosivfDate accessed November 5, 2020Google Scholar, 37CryoStorkFrequently Asked Questions What you need to know about transporting frozen embryos, sperm, and IVF samples safely securely with CryoStork.httpsmycryostork.comfaqshippingfrozenembryosspermsafelycostinsuranceDate accessed November 5, 2020Google Scholar, recent studies report that methods of shipment and types of transportation matter. Liquid nitrogen vapor containers or dry shippers cryotanks filled with liquid nitrogen that is absorbed into porous interior packing material are commonly preferred for air transport, whereas liquid nitrogenfilled tanks are more often seen in shorter, landbased travel because of the specific requirements and risks of each mode of transport 6Alikani M. Parmegiani L. Human reproductive cell cryopreservation, storage, handling, and transport risks and risk management.Semin Reprod Med. 2018 36 265272Crossref PubMed Scopus 7 Google Scholar. Damage to vitrified oocytes has been reported from factors such as vibrationmovement, increased temperature, air pressure, and horizontal tank positioning during transport 38McDonald C.A. Valluzo L.