doi 10.25259ijmr_30_23. COVID19 pandemic neurosciences in India the CoINstudy Impact of the pandemic on research related to the neurosciences. Samim MM1, Pantoji M2, Divya KP3, Deora H4, Shashidhar A4, Baishya J5, Garg D6, Elavarasi A7, Pahwa B8, Mehta UM2, Tikka SK9, Wadwekar V10, Dubey S11, Jain K1, Bhaskarapillai B12, Viswanathan LG1, Asranna A1. Author information 1Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, Karnataka, India. 2Department of Psychiatry, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, Karnataka, India. 3Department of Neurology, Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, India. 4Department of Neurosurgery, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, Karnataka, India. 5Department of Neurology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India. 6Department of Neurology, Vardhman Mahavir Medical College Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi, India. 7Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. 8University College of Medical Sciences and Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, New Delhi, India. 9Department of Psychiatry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bibinagar, Telangana, India. 10Department of Neurology, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry, India. 11Department of Neurology, Bangur Institute of Neurosciences, Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education Research and Seth Sukhlal Karnani Memorial Hospital, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. 12Department of Biostatistics, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, Karnataka, India. Background objectives We aimed to assess the impact of COVID19related disruptions on ongoing and future projects related to neuroscience research and young researchers in India. Methods We conducted a countrywide online survey using a structured, selfadministered questionnaire involving medical trainees, postdoctoral fellows, PhD students, early career faculty members and basic neuroscience researchers. The purpose was to assess the impact of the COVID19 pandemic on the respondents ongoingplanned research activities and capture their concerns related to future research. Results Five hundred and four valid responses were analyzed. More than threefourths of the respondents were in their early careers 64.1 per cent were resident doctors, and 19.8 per cent were early career consultants. Maximum responses were received from respondents working in neurology 228 45.2, followed by psychiatry 192 38.1 and neurosurgery 49 9.7. More than threefourths 83.5, 95 confidence interval CI 0.80.867 of the respondents reported that the pandemic had affected their research. About onethird of the respondents 171 33.9 reported delays in completing research studies. Respondents adapted to the pandemics circumstances by making methodological changes in their research 155 30.8. Most respondents 301 59.6 reported being diverted from their traditional work settings to COVID19related clinical services. Respondents conducting prospective studies and randomized controlled trials and those diverted to COVIDrelated services were significantly more likely to report the adverse research impact. Interpretation conclusions In our survey, an overwhelming majority of the respondents reported that the pandemic adversely impacted their study. This trend was independent of sex, designation, and research output of individual subjects. The serious impact of the COVID19 pandemic on neurosciences research warrants the attention and concerted efforts of the research supervisors, institutional heads, funding agencies and other stakeholders. DOI 10.25259ijmr_30_23 PMID 39382468 Indexed for MEDLINE