They also include underlying factors political empowerment, nondiscriminatory inclusion in social and political interactions, and the opportunity to voice claims. In our view, the report rightly characterised vast health gaps between groups of people as unfair, labelling them health inequities rather than inequalities. According to Margaret Whitehead, health equity implies that ideally everyone should have a fair opportunity to attain their full health potential and, more pragmatically, that no one should be disadvantaged from achieving this potential, if it can be avoided. The aim of policy for equity and health is not to eliminate all health differences so that everyone has the same level and quality of health, but rather to reduce or eliminate those that result from factors considered to be both avoidable and unfair.14Whitehead M The concepts and principles of equity and health.Int J Health Serv. 1992 22 429445Crossref PubMed Scopus 1029 Google Scholar Nation states are responsible for respecting, protecting, and fulfilling their populations right to health, but with globalisation many important determinants of health lie beyond any single governments control, and are now inherently global.15Labonté R Spiegel J Setting global health research priorities.BMJ. 2003 326 722723Crossref PubMed Scopus 62 Google Scholar Besides local and national action, combating health inequity increasingly requires improvement of global governance. Although determinants of health exist at many levelsfrom individual biological variance to local and national societal arrangementssome determinants are tied to transnational activity and global political interaction. These global factors have received insufficient attention, perhaps because the causal linkages are complex and difficult to untangle, or because the implications can be controversial and unwelcome to some. An abundance of scientific evidence shows the existence of a social gradient in relation to health inequalities and exposure to health risks.11Wilkinson R Pickett K The spirit level why equality is better for everyone. Penguin Books, London2010Google Scholar We assert that health inequity requires a moral judgmentit must be considered unfair and avoidable by reasonable means. We argue that the norms, policies, and practices that arise from global political interaction the global political determinants of health and that unfavourably affect the health of some groups of people compared with others are indeed unfair. Some of these global political determinants could be avoided by improving the way global governance works. Tackling these global political determinants could thereby improve fairness in health. The 2008 report of the Commission on Social Determinants of Health drew attention to political conditions that underpin unfair economic and societal arrangements. However, its analysis did not aim to address the underlying global forces, processes, and institutions that create the conditions that cause health inequity.16Birn AE Making it political closing the gap in a generation health equity through action on the social determinants of health.Soc Med. 2009 4 166182Google Scholar As stated in a 2011 Comment in The Lancet An increased understanding of how public health can be better protected and promoted in various global governance processes is urgent, but complex and politically sensitive. These issues involve the distribution of economic, intellectual, normative, and political resources, and require a candid assessment of power structures.17Ottersen OP Frenk J Horton R The LancetUniversity of Oslo Commission on Global Governance for Health, in collaboration with the Harvard Global Health Institute.Lancet. 2011 378 16121613Summary Full Text Full Text PDF PubMed Scopus 32 Google Scholar Our response to this challenge requires the exploration of the plausible pathways through which transnational actions and global governance processes affect health equity. The sections that follow serve as a conceptual framework that guides analyses of a series of case examples. These examples have been selected from among important policy intervention areas in which global governance has failed to protect peoples health against factors considered to be both avoidable and unfair.14Whitehead M The concepts and principles of equity and health.Int J Health Serv. 1992 22 429445Crossref PubMed Scopus 1029 Google Scholar We show how power asymmetry and global norms limit the range of choice and constrain action, but also sometimes provide opportunities. Looking across the cases, we also identify systemic dysfunctions that hinder global governance from shaping positive determinants of health and from tackling the negative determinants. We urge responsible actors and opinion leaders to act, and we offer a range of actionable ideas for further consideration and development. With globalisation, transnational activities that involve actors with different interests and degrees of power, such as states, transnational corporations, and civil society, have increased. When interests conflict or major disparities in power exist, such transnational activities can have inequitable, negative effects on health, whether intended or not. In such cases, combating health inequity is both a global and a political challenge. Meeting this challenge requires action beyond the health sector or nation state alone, and demands improved global governance across all sectors. We follow Weiss and Thakurs definition18Thakur R Weiss TG The UN and global governance an idea and its prospects. Indiana University Press, 2006Google Scholar of global governance as The complex of formal and informal institutions, mechanisms, relationships, and processes between and among states, markets, citizens, and organisations, both intergovernmental and nongovernmental, through which collective interests on the global plane are articulated, rights and obligations are established, and differences are mediated. This Commission is based on the concept of global governance for health. We regard health as a political challenge, not merely as a technical outcome. Global governance for health is achieved when we obtain a fair and equitable global governance system, based on a more democratic distribution of political and economic power that is socially and environmentally sustainable.19Benatar SR Gill S Bakker I Making progress in global health the need for new paradigms.Int Aff. 2009 85 347371Crossref Scopus 48 Google Scholar Global governance for health is distinct from the concept of global health governance, which is defined as The use of formal and informal institutions, rules, and processes by states, intergovernmental institutions, and nonstate actors to deal with challenges to health that require crossborder collective action to address effectively.20Fidler D The challenges of global health governance. Council on Foreign Relations, New York2010Google Scholar Whereas global health governance is often used to refer to the governance of the global health systemdefined as the actors and institutions with the primary purpose of health21Szlezák NA Bloom BR Jamison DT et al.The global health system actors, norms, and expectations in transition.PLoS Med. 2010 7 e1000183Crossref PubMed Scopus 70 Google Scholarglobal governance for health refers to all governance areas that can affect health. Implicitly, it makes the normative claim that health equity should be an objective for all sectors. As such, the Commission does not focus on improving the governance of global health actors, but rather looks at how global governance processes outside the health arena can work better for health and for the continued success of the global health actors. In our analysis, we are particularly concerned with global political determinants of health. This concept is not new. Many scholars have brought attention to the global and political nature of health and health equity.1Kickbusch I Mapping the future of public health action on global health.Can J Public Health. 2006 97 68PubMed Google Scholar, 22Benatar S Brock G Global health and global health ethics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge2011Crossref Scopus 71 Google Scholar, 23Kickbusch I Tackling the political determinants of global health.BMJ. 2005 331 246247Crossref PubMed Scopus 21 Google Scholar, 24Kickbusch I Addressing the interface of the political and commercial determinants of health.Health Promot Int. 2012 27 427428Crossref PubMed Scopus 42 Google Scholar, 25Global Health WatchGlobal Health Watch 3. Zed Books, London2011Google Scholar, 26Bambra C Fox D ScottSamuel A Towards a politics of health.Health Promot Int. 2005 20 187193Crossref PubMed Scopus 251 Google Scholar, 27Lee K How do we move forward on the social determinants of health the global governance challenges.Crit Public Health. 2010 20 514Crossref Scopus 17 Google Scholar However, the concept has not been consistently defined. The Commission builds on existing work in defining the global political determinants of health as the transnational norms, policies, and practices that arise from political interaction across all sectors that affect health. This definition can include all rules that guide behaviour, from broad social norms to specific policies eg, trade agreements and practices eg, unregulated activities of transnational corporations. Political determinants operate in various ways. First, global norms guide societal interaction they shape how problems or issues are viewed in global governance, and frame the types of solutions that are proposed, sometimes excluding discussion of alternative options. Second, political determinants such as rules of representation, voting, transparency, and accountability relate to who participates in global decisionmaking processes, and to how these processes are shaped by actors with different values, interests, and power. Finally, the outcomes of governance processes, such as formalised policies and agreements, shape practices at the national level. The 1994 World Trade Organization WTO Agreement on Agriculture is an example of a policy that aimed neither to harm nor to promote health. WTO protection of subsidised agriculture in developed countries, however, reduced the competitiveness of smallscale farmers in developing countries it could thus be argued that the policy caused food insecurity, malnutrition, and associated health outcomes, and hence negatively affected health. As this example shows, a policy with no healthrelated aspirations can still severely affect health. The WHO Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel exemplifies a policy intended to promote health equity. It aims to ensure a fairer distribution of healthcare workers by limiting resourcerich countries from attracting health personnel away from resourcepoor countries with the greatest health needs. Ultimately, this code, if effective, will contribute to the fairer distribution of health workers and improved access to health services.