On the other hand, when employed as a normative standard, the system of rights is vulnerable to the criticism that it universalizes a particular European or Western experience of constitutionalism, sidelining other forms of democratic selfgovernment. Does this then disqualify Habermas account? The latter of the two issues hardly poses a problem. Even if the emergence of democratic constitutionalism may initially have been a European particularity, arguably the notion of free and equal citizens exercising selfrule through the medium of positive law also underpins nonWestern democratic constitutions, without it always or necessarily being a Western imposition see, e.g., Ackerman, 2015 Galligan Versteeg, 2013. It may well be that some societiespossibly at local or substate levelshave opted for radically different forms of organizing democracy, and it seems clear the system of rights cannot be applied to those societies. But these are rare exceptions. Recall, moreover, that the four categories of basic rights are abstract placeholder rights whose concrete content is meant to be shaped by real constitutionmakers. This also tempers the force of the objection that Habermas approach unduly universalizes a European experience of constitutionalism, for it raises the prospect of a large variety of substantive formulations of rights that are informed by nonWestern normative commitments Khaitan, 2019b. As already noted, decoupling the form of rights from their content makes space for a plurality of constitutionalism. The former issue, to do with the Eurocentrism of Habermas theory of modernity, proves more complicated. If a normatively adequate account of democratic regressions is to emerge, it seems that a step back from Habermas is requiredotherwise, it is difficult to see how desideratum 2 could be satisfied. One possibility is to retain the developmental theory of modernity and restrict the scope of application. This is what Ahlhaus and Niesen 2019 attempt in their account of selective regressions. Their suggestion is that one can fruitfully deploy an Enlightenment conception of progress to identify regressions as long as one does not universalize its reach Insofar as the discussion of regressions has an indexical reference to ones own order, it can dispel the suspicion that it has an imperial understanding of progress, as it criticizes the collective self, not the other Ahlhaus Niesen, 2019, p. 494.