5Stakeholder representative, Edinburgh, UK. 6Healthcare Improvement Scotland, Edinburgh, UK. 7Department of Vision Sciences, School of Health and Life Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow, UK. BACKGROUND We conducted an NIHRfunded evidence synthesis project, reviewing evidence relating to interventions for perceptual disorders following stroke. This related paper describes how people with lived experience of strokerelated perceptual disorders contributed to and influenced the project, and identifies lessons for future review projects. METHODS We planned our patient and public involvement and engagement PPIE activities within a study protocol, described according to the domains of the ACTIVE framework these were founded on principles for good practice in PPIE. Activities occurred across the lifespan of the project, consisting primarily of group discussions and voting to determine if there was consensus. To assess impact and individual experiences, we sought feedback using an evaluation form after each discussion, and conducted an online meeting at the end of the project to allow further reflection. RESULTS We recruited five people to a Lived Experience Group, including two stroke survivors and three carers. Members attended one facetoface meeting during the development of the review. Subsequent activities were all held online due to the COVID19 pandemic with six online meetings, plus email interactions. Positive impacts of the Lived Experience Group on the reviews included clear definitions of key terms, selection of outcome measures, agreement on implications of review findings, and identification of research recommendations. Key challenges identified related to the complexity of the topic and challenges in the use of new online technology as a consequence of the COVIDpandemic. CONCLUSIONS A number of lessons were learned during this project. Specific recommendations for future PPIE are to ensure that those involved have an opportunity to get to know one another, and to provide optional sessions to increase familiarity with online meeting software, clear explanations of the purpose of involvement and specific feedback after each activity. These lessons should be considered when planning the PPIE within future reviews. 2024.