So an IC may arguably sometimes fulfill some of its tasks even if states decide not to defer to its judgments and interpretations. The relationship between descriptive42 and normative legitimacy and their importance for compliance merits attention.43 On the present account, descriptive legitimacy refers to social facts concerning actors beliefs about the legitimate authority of the IC.44 Such beliefs about normative legitimacy sometimes appear to have motivating force. Compliance may, of course, be due not to such beliefs, but simply because it is cheapwhen the IC requires actors to do what they would anyway have done.45 But actors belief in the legitimate authority of an IC may contribute to more costly compliance, because agents believe that the judgment gives them a new reason to act in certain ways, which makes them somewhat more likely to act accordingly. Governments belief in the legitimate authority of an IC can engender enough diffuse support to secure deference to it even by those who lose a case or disagree with a legal interpretation.46 This normative compliance pull47 may be due to the IC being seen to carry out the tasks discussed above international courts will enjoy support and be accepted as authoritative only if states and other key stakeholders perceive them as beneficial, at least in the long run.48 So reasons to defer to the judgments of an IC, as a legitimate authority, may be governments commitment not to free ride on agreed plans, or to respect their citizens human rights and to assure constituencies thereof. Such public justifications may be legitimation strategies to create diffuse support for and compliance with ICs, necessary for them to perform their tasks and respond to resistance.49 A second connection between compliance and legitimacy arises in the complex reputation games of an economy of legitimacy.50 Noncompliance with an ICs judgments may affect others beliefs about the ICs normative legitimacy, or about the noncompliant actors normative legitimacyor both. Thus young ICs often appear concerned to build their descriptive legitimacy by issuing judgments with low costs on all states.51 The ICJ appeared to enhance its descriptive legitimacy in the eyes of some states, when the US failed to comply with its 1986 decision in favour of Nicaragua.52 The decision was evidence that the ICJ adjudicated disputes by legal methods, rather than succumbing to the stronger state. This independence strengthened constituencies belief that the ICJ enjoyed legitimate authority. A third connection is that compliance by some states with an ICfor example, due to its descriptive legitimacymay affect its actual normative legitimacy, enabling states to prevent free riding on agreed rules. An IC fails in this task if many states refuse to defer to it. In this case the IC cannot help any state to redress the coordination challenge it is no legitimate authority for any state. Typologies of legitimacy critiques of ICs often identify three disjoint clusters without noting any theoretical framework for them 1 the origin of the IC how and why it was set up discussed in Section A 2 whether its procedures are appropriate for its tasks, such as adjudicating disputes by legal methods Section B concerns about the ICs effects in several senses Section C.53 These clusters are the main ways ICs can fail in their tasks, and hence fail to be legitimate authorities whose judgments merit deference. This account can guide attempts to assess whether such criticisms are sound. According to international law, states must consent to any IC jurisdiction.54 Critics challenge both whether state consent should be necessary, and whether it is sufficient to create morally binding obligations to defer.55 There are certainly reasons to lament recalcitrant states who fail to join ICs that are efficacious and necessary for morally mandatory aims,56 such as, arguably, to address war crimes,57 or to protect human rights and the environment. This account acknowledges some of these concerns. States may often have good reason to defer to certain ICs, yet fail to do so, and they may have several further reasons not to free ride on those who consent. Yet some such criticisms may be overdrawn, and often beg the question of which might be better mechanisms than consent to identify state obligations. A common yet problematic argument for state consent is the presumptive ability of state representatives to speak and act on behalf of nations and their citizenrywhich confers a significant degree of legitimacy on international courts.58 The nature of authorization that authoritarian governments have to act on behalf of their citizens is unclear. And state consent to an IC in general or to a particular arbitration often does not seem sufficiently informed, free or democratically representative to create normative obligations characteristic of consent in other settings. Thus argues the Third World Approach to International Law TWAIL.59 Many states have neither influence nor any real alternative to consent to the WTO or to bilateral investment treaties BITs, unfair impacts notwithstanding.60 Nevertheless, this account recognizes several reasons to give some weight to state consenteven by authoritarian statesin negotiating the treaties that establish ICs and becoming subject to their jurisdiction.61 This is not to say that states lack of clear consent rules out recognized nonconsensual sources of international law, such as customary international law including jus cogens norms, and general principles of public international law.62 State consent may avoid or reduce several problems. Since states generally have control over their own territories, the governments consent makes it more likely that it will enforce obligations and IC judgments domestically.63 The increased likelihood of general compliance may in turn strengthen each states reason to comply with ICs. State consent may also express a commitment to fair procedures, insofar as the alternative is that the stronger states do as they will.64 To require consent may also somewhat alleviate risks of domination by more powerful states in treaty negotiations. While states may still abuse their position to secure unfair gains, or block fair treaties, consent by all states may yield a more equitable distribution of benefits and burdens than the alternative of powerful states simply imposing rules. And even citizens of authoritarian states may benefit from some treaties and from ICs for trade, border disputes, and domestic human rights. Even though the treaties are often imposed on some states and citizens, the ICs may still be legitimate authorities insofar as they help both democratic and authoritarian states act in better accordance with their appropriate reasons. This is not to deny that yet other modes of treaty making might yield more fair outcomesfor example, in a world without authoritarian states, or by a qualified majority in a global parliament. State consent may sometimes also be a useful mechanism for states to converge on one among several treaty agreements, each of which suffices to coordinate well, for example in battle of the sexes situations.65 Such convergence will require every state to defer to the agreed IC, even though most states would have reasons to prefer other treaties.66 These are not decisive reasons for state consent as a normatively desirable condition for the legitimacy of ICs. Consent is often a suboptimal mechanism, and other mechanisms may also reduce domination, or help select salient coordination points. A wide range of legitimacy challenges to ICs concern their procedures in a broad sense.