eCollection 2024. An assessment of PET and CMR radiomic features for the detection of cardiac sarcoidosis. Mushari NA1, Soultanidis G2, Duff L13, Trivieri MG24, Fayad ZA2, Robson P2, Tsoumpas C125. Author information 1Leeds Institute of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. 2BioMedical Engineering and Imaging Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States. 3Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. 4Cardiovascular Research Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States. 5Department of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. BACKGROUND Visual interpretation of PET and CMR may fail to identify cardiac sarcoidosis CS with high specificity. This study aimed to evaluate the role of 18FFDG PET and late gadolinium enhancement LGECMR radiomic features in differentiating CS from another cause of myocardial inflammation, in this case patients with cardiacrelated clinical symptoms following COVID19. METHODS 18FFDG PET and LGECMR were treated separately in this work. There were 35 postCOVID19 PC and 40 CS datasets. Regions of interest were delineated manually around the entire left ventricle for the PET and LGECMR datasets. Radiomic features were then extracted. The ability of individual features to correctly identify image data as CS or PC was tested to predict the clinical classification of CS vs. PC using MannWhitney Utests and logistic regression. Features were retained if the Pvalue was 0.00053, the AUC was 0.5, and the accuracy was 0.7. After applying the correlation test, uncorrelated features were used as a signature joint features to train machine learning classifiers. For LGECMR analysis, to further improve the results, different classifiers were used for individual features besides logistic regression, and the results of individual features of each classifier were screened to create a signature that included all features that followed the previously mentioned criteria and used it them as input for machine learning classifiers. RESULTS The MannWhitney Utests and logistic regression were trained on individual features to build a collection of features. For 18FFDG PET analysis, the maximum targettobackground ratio TBRmax showed a high area under the curve AUC and accuracy with small Pvalues 0.00053, but the signature performed better AUC 0.98 and accuracy 0.91. For LGECMR analysis, the Gray Level Dependence Matrix gldmDependence NonUniformity showed good results with small error bars accuracy 0.75 and AUC 0.87. However, by applying a Support Vector Machine classifier to individual LGECMR features and creating a signature, a Random Forest classifier displayed better AUC and accuracy 0.91 and 0.84, respectively. CONCLUSION Using radiomic features may prove useful in identifying individuals with CS. Some features showed promising results in differentiating between PC and CS. By automating the analysis, the patient management process can be accelerated and improved. 2024 Mushari, Soultanidis, Duff, Trivieri, Fayad, Robson and Tsoumpas. DOI 10.3389fnume.2024.1324698 PMCID PMC11460291 PMID 39381033 Conflict of interest statement The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The authors declared that they were editorial board members of Frontiers at the time of submission. This had no impact on the peer review process or the final decision.