Executing domestic courts are only allowed to check the issuing courts independence on an exceptional, casebycase basis. The applicable judicial test has first been laid down in Aranyosi and Căldăraru para. 81, which concerned prison conditions. The same test has been relied on by the CJEU in the LM para. 70 case in relation to doubts concerning the independence of the requesting court, as if it was selfevident that prisons and courts would raise the same problématique. The CJEU could have developed a different test for systemic Rule of Law deficiencies, but instead it followed the same logic applied to potential human rights deficiencies in Aranyosi, given that the issue of judicial independence also boils down to a human rights problem of the requested person, namely their right to a fair trial. As the first step of the Aranyosi test the executing court must assess whether the operation of the justice system in the issuing state suffers from general deficiencies in terms of judicial independence. If it does not, the individual must be surrendered. 27 If it does, the second, individual prong of the test kicks in, where the judge must determine, specifically and precisely, whether there are substantial grounds to believe that the requested person will be exposed to a real risk of a violation of their fair trial rights, also with regard to a potential lack of independence of the courts, 28 if surrendered Bárd and van Ballegooij, 2018 van Ballegooij and Bárd, 2016. To agree with AG Sharpston, this prong of the test is unduly stringent, 29 if not unworkable. What is more, the CJEU obliges requested and requesting courts to engage in a discussion about compliance with established by law and judicial independence requirements, which essentially means that, absurdly, the fake courts and impostors posing as judges, who issued the EAWs, are invited to assess their own compliance themselves. But the problem is even broader than that properly appointed and independent individual judges cannot save a flawed system Bárd and Morijn, 2020. The CJEU nevertheless insisted on the LM test in L and P, no matter how severe the systemic problem is, pretending that judges can still retain their independence in the middle of state and judicial capture. 30 The Court in effect sacrificed the fundamental right to an independent tribunal established by law to the altar of mutual trust An interpretation to the contrary would amount to extending the limitations that may be placed on the principles of mutual trust and mutual recognition beyond exceptional circumstances, 31 insisting on this further, also in WO and JL, which postdates the ruling of the compromised Polish Constitutional Court in K321 2021 that Article 191 TEU as such is not in line with Polish Constitution. This is not the first instance when CJEU sacrifices substantive principles in the name of procedural ones, but a telling one nevertheless Kochenov, 2015. Similarly to a body, which is not established by law, but is still welcome to enter some kind of dialogue with CJEU post Getin Noble Bank, a judge in a flawed system suffering from serious rule of law deficiencies unquestionably qualifies as issuing judicial authority for a EAW, thanks to the CJEUs insistence on LM at the expense of human rights and the rule of law. The test is designed to justify even the most gruesome nationallevel rule of law deficiencies no matter what. However independent the individual judge, surrendering anyone to Poland today is particularly questionable from the point of view of fundamental rights, since it is well established by the CJEU and ECtHR that all the highest courts in the Country are irregularly composed, including the criminal chamber of the Polish Supreme Court. Appeals are thus unquestionably and surely bound to result in Article 6 ECHR rights violations of anyone surrendered, as CJEU knows very well. The CJEU acquired a rare chance to test the judicial independence and irremovability standards as applied to its own members as a result of Brexit. The departure of the UK on 1 February 2020 resulted in the shrinking of the membership of the Court, as all the CJEU judges appointed by the UK stopped being members of the Court on the day of Brexit. The same did not apply to AG Sharpston since the Treaties did not require AGs to resign upon the departure of the Member State of their nationality from the Union, she continued serving on the Court past the Brexit date. This situation displeased some Member States, 32 and a political decision was taken to interpret AG Sharpstons office as affected by Brexit Council of the European Union, 2020 in direct violation of the express wording of the Treaties, which did not make such a connection. The Herren der Verträge thus decided to amend the Treaties by a political agreement inter se and appoint a Greek gentleman as an AG although no vacancy existed and the cardinal principle of irremovability in CJEU and ECtHR caselaw should have been applied to AG Sharpston. Marking a radical difference with the situation in Poland, the President of the Court seemingly assisted the Member States in breaking the law and removing a sitting member whose mandate has not expired, in breach of the Treaties and underlying principles of judicial independence see Kochenov and Butler, 2022. AG Sharpston brought a number of actions in front of the General Court and the action of the Member States initiating the unlawful appointment was briefly suspended Judge Collins hearing the case reasoned that the negative consequences of replacing a lawfully appointed office holder by someone who may ultimately be deemed to have been appointed unlawfully, are selfevident. Such a scenario is not in the interests of the applicant nor in those of her possible successor. 33 He gave the Member States and the Council several days to present their arguments. The Member States and the Court, in a farcical move of aberration of justice, orchestrated an ex parte urgent appeal against a nonfinal interim measure, allowing the Vice President of the Court of Justice to de facto hijack the case and dismiss it as prima facie having no prospects of success. 34 The Greek usurper was installed even before AG Sharpston 2021 learnt about the appeal against Judge Collins order and she was never given a chance to present her case formally again. The Vice President of the Court of Justice was clear that the action of the Member States was a common accord under Article 253 TFEU and was unreviewable no matter what, 35 siding with the abuse of the Courts independence and dismissing outright the basic idea that Article 19 TEU contains the same principles and applies equally to the national and supranational courts alike. The Vice President purported to decide the entire case on an ex parte application against an ex parte freezing order Rozenberg, 2020 which was not final to the end that, in a nutshell, the CJEU does not enjoy independence from the Member States. The outcome of the case was such that the Member States were allowed by the Court absolute room for manœuvre in mingling with the Courts composition including the instances where their intervention was not only ultra vires, but also directly contra legem and making the concerns of Judge Collins of the General Court more acute what is the power of the Courts decisions if its composition as such is tainted by manifest illegality? While the Court of Justice preferred not to say, dismissing all the cases and denying independence to the General Court too, which was de facto preempted by the Vice President of the Court of Justice in the Sharpston cases, 36 the answer based on its own standards of judicial independence, as well as the key caselaw on the matter from the ECtHR is quite clear and alarming a Court open to absolute interference by the sovereign in direct contradiction with the letter and the spirit of the law in a context where such interventions are not reviewable, is not a tribunal established by law in the sense of Xero Flor. Even more, Grzęda indicates that an unlawfully appointed individual taints compliance with Article 61 ECHR, as an impostor cannot adjudicate and the panel is thus improperly composed. It appears, thus, that the CJEU applies a radically different standard of judicial independence to itself the one that directly contradicts its own caselaw related to the PiS attacks on Polish courts and which is in prima facie violation of the ECtHR standard. The new standard of judicial independence established by the Court of Justice in the Sharpston cases is thus the most deficient among all the standards present in the European legal space. It does not only directly contradict the CJEUs own caselaw on irremovability of judges and security of tenure, but also the ECtHR standard, which is more demanding. Speaking openly, the standard comes down to allowing for a carte blanche to unlimited interference by the political powers with the Courts composition in the absence of any references to the law or basic legality. The Sharpston cases are thus a no legality standard. If applied to the Polish Rule of Law situation, the Sharpston standard would have cleared PiS attacks on the independence of the Polish courts as fully legitimate. The most important court in the framework of a project of integration through law thus emerged as falling short of meeting the basic European standards of what is a tribunal established by law an immensely dangerous deficiency. What is particularly puzzling is that it came in the context where the Courts unlawful servility visàvis the Member States was also absolutely unnecessary, given that AG Sharpston had only one year left to serve. For the past one and a half decades the ECtHR has presumed that ECHR obligations are respected when states implement EU law, given that the protection of fundamental rights afforded by the EU was in principle equivalent to that of the Convention system. 37 But the ECtHR also made clear that this Bosphorus presumption is rebuttable, even if the threshold was high. 38 The equivalence in human rights protection can only be rebutted if a manifest deficiency is established. For a long time the presumption proved to be well founded. The multiplication of judicial independence standards in the EU, which now includes several standards in direct contravention of the basic requirements of Article 61 ECHR could mark an unfortunate beginning of a new era. Indeed, when CJEU insists on accepting preliminary references from the bodies not established by law and where the CJEU itself, allows for unchecked unlawful interference by the Member States into its own composition, the question arises whether the principles cherished by the two systems are really the same. Granted, the EU in not a member of the ECHR, yet, the basic adherence to the key principles of Article 61 ECHR as well as own law is still to be expected of the CJEU and this is what is missing from the diverse and incoherent judicial independence picture painted by CJEU in the interests of judicial dialogue, mutual trust and other procedural approaches to EU law. Worse still, there is a set of laws in the area of freedom, security and justice, which were adopted along the principle of mutual trust, and where member states are specifically called upon to lower their scrutiny and almost automatically recognize eachothers decisions. As the CJEU held in Opinion 213 essentially vetoing EU accession to the ECHR, when implementing EU law, Member States may be required to presume that fundamental rights have been observed by all other Member States, meaning that save in exceptional cases, they may not check whether that other Member State has actually, in a specific case, observed the fundamental rights guaran