Second, inadequate means to constrain power and poor transparency make it difficult to hold actors to account for their actions weak accountability mechanisms. Third, norms, rules, and decisionmaking procedures are often impervious to changing needs and can sustain entrenched power disparities, with adverse effects on the distribution of health institutional stickiness. Fourth, inadequate means exist at both national and global levels to protect health in global policymaking arenas outside of the health sector, such that health can be subordinated under other objectives inadequate policy space for health. Lastly, in a range of policymaking areas, there is a total or near absence of international institutions eg, treaties, funds, courts, and softer forms of regulation such as norms and guidelines to protect and promote health missing or nascent institutions. Recognising that major drivers of ill health lie beyond the control of national governments and, in many instances, also outside of the health sector, we assert that some of the root causes of health inequity must be addressed within global governance processes. For the continued success of the global health system, its initiatives must not be thwarted by political decisions in other arenas. Rather, global governance processes outside the health arena must be made to work better for health. The Commission calls for stronger crosssectoral global action for health. We propose for consideration a Multistakeholder Platform on Governance for Health, which would serve as a policy forum to provide space for diverse stakeholders to frame issues, set agendas, examine and debate policies in the making that would have an effect on health and health equity, and identify barriers and propose solutions for concrete policy processes. Additionally, we call for the independent monitoring of how global governance processes affect health equity to be institutionalised through an Independent Scientific Monitoring Panel and mandated health equity impact assessments within international organisations. The Commission also calls for measures to better harness the global political determinants of health. We call for strengthened use of human rights instruments for health, such as the Special Rapporteurs, and stronger sanctions against a broader range of violations by nonstate actors through the international judicial system. We recognise that global governance for health must be rooted in commitments to global solidarity and shared responsibility through rightsbased approaches and new frameworks for international financing that go beyond traditional development assistance, such as for research and social protection. We want to send a strong message to the international community and to all actors that exert influence in processes of global governance we must no longer regard health only as a technical biomedical issue, but acknowledge the need for global crosssectoral action and justice in our efforts to address health inequity. We are challenged to develop a public health approach that responds to the globalised world. The present global health crisis is not primarily one of disease, but of governance.1Kickbusch I Mapping the future of public health action on global health.Can J Public Health. 2006 97 68PubMed Google ScholarIlona Kickbusch The Commission on Global Governance for Health is motivated by a shared conviction that the present system of global governance fails to adequately protect public health. This failure strikes unevenly and is especially disastrous for the worlds most vulnerable, marginalised, and poorest populations. Health inequalities have multiple causes, some of which are rooted in how the world is organised panel 1.Panel 1Global health inequitiesAbout 842 million people worldwide are chronically hungry,2FAOInternational Fund for Agricultural DevelopmentWorld Food ProgrammeThe state of food insecurity in the world 2013the multiple dimensions of food security. Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome2013Google Scholar one in six children in developing countries is underweight,3WHOGlobal Health Observatory GHOunderweight in children.httpwww.who.intghomdgpoverty_hungerunderweightenindex.htmlGoogle Scholar, 4WHOInterim report on the implementation of the Tallinn Charter. World Health Organization, Copenhagen2011Google Scholar and more than a third of deaths among children younger than 5 years are attributable to malnutrition. Unequal access to sufficient, safe, and nutritious food persists even though global food production is enough to cover 120 of global dietary needs.2FAOInternational Fund for Agricultural DevelopmentWorld Food ProgrammeThe state of food insecurity in the world 2013the multiple dimensions of food security. Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome2013Google Scholar15 billion people face threats to their physical integrity, their health being undermined not only by direct bodily harm, but also by extreme psychological stress due to fear, loss, and disintegration of the social fabric in areas of chronic insecurity, occupation, and war.5World BankWorld development report 2011 conflict, security, and development. World Bank, Washington DC2011Crossref Google ScholarLife expectancy differs by 21 years between the highestranking and lowestranking countries on the human development index. Even in 18 of the 26 countries with the largest reductions in child deaths during the past decade, the difference in mortality is increasing between the least and most deprived quintiles of children.6UNDPHuman development report 2013. The rise of the south human progress in a diverse world. United Nations Development Programme, New York2013Crossref Google ScholarMore than 80 of the worlds population are not covered by adequate social protection arrangements.