Online ahead of print. Electrostatic interactions and structural transformations in viral shells. Golushko IY1, Roshal DS1, Konevtsova OV1, Rochal SB1, Podgornik R2345. Author information 1Faculty of Physics, Southern Federal University, RostovonDon, Russia. rochal_syahoo.fr. 2School of Physical Sciences and Kavli Institute for Theoretical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. 3CAS Key Laboratory of Soft Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. 4Wenzhou Institute of the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, China. 5Department of Theoretical Physics, Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia. rudolf.podgornikijs.si. Structural transformations occurring in proteinaceous viral shells capsids can be induced by changing the pH of bathing solution, thus modifying the dissociation equilibrium of ionizable amino acids in proteins. To analyze the effects of electrostatic interactions on viral capsids, we construct a model of 2D isotropic elastic shells with embedded point charges located in the centers of mass of individual proteins. We find that modification of the electrostatic interactions between proteins affects not only the size and shape of capsids, but in addition induces substantial deformations of hexamers in capsid structures. Using bacteriophage P22 and Nudarelia capensis omega virus NωV as examples, we analyze the capsid faceting and propose an explanation as to why the hexamers in spherical procapsid are skewed, while they acquire a regular shape in the faceted state. Also, we examine the electrostatic and elastic effects that can explain different shapes of coronavirus shells decorated with spikes, which are often localized in compact areas over the shell surface. The proposed mechanism of local curvature generation is supported by the remarkable correspondence between the shell shape and the distribution of spikes in model and observed shells. DOI 10.1039d4nr02612h PMID 39380336