In some countries, such as France and Belgium, there was a national strategy from the beginning. In other countries, such as Germany and Italy, there was initially a regional logic, defined in some regions, which then resulted in national political coordination, which then became a national or coordinated strategy of resource allocation and what regions should do at an operational level. Whereas in Germany, the crisisrelated agenda setting and problemsolving started at the local level with functionally strong local public health services and the Länder being responsible for pandemic crisis management, in France and Italy, the central state was the key actor, while local and regional governments played a more or less subordinate role. Belgium took a middle position on the one hand, the regions assumed major functions in crisis management on the other hand, the position of the federation became increasingly pronounced over the course of the crisis. Coordinating How to Make Complex Things Happen through Standardized Solutions or Exceptional Solutions? Implementing logics in an effective way requires coherent operational and managerial standardized practices, such as topdown versus bottomup decisionmaking, coordination of measures, linking of experts and administrators, or linking of administrators and politicians. To streamline multiple actors at multiple levels, a combination of topdown and bottomup dynamics is indispensable. The combinations of modes of crisis management vary among the European countries, from enforced topdown France, to predominantly topdown with operational bottomup Italy, to delegatednegotiatedcoordinated topdown with significant bottomup Belgium and Germany tables 1 and 2. This has allowed the avoidance of a joint decision trap of nondecision, and it has allowed subcentral pilot practices to spread to other parts of the country. Most countries have secured coordination through a central ministry health, interior, or prime minister or a department of an agency civil protection. However, the classic coordination problem of silos remains a point of attention to avoid disconnects. This has been particularly evident with regard to sanitary and public health policies as the number of subjects involved in the legislation and execution is very high, especially in Germany and Italy table 2. In Germany, most of the competencies to respond are at the Länder and local levels. The federal minister of health pledges for the Länder for compliance, and the chancellor pushes for coordinated measures but is not in the position to impose them on the Länder. To achieve nationwide solutions and uniform standards, in Germany, the horizontal selfcoordination of all 16 Länder plus the vertical involvement of the federal level is necessary. The same, more or less, applies to Belgium, a federal state that lacks hierarchy between the national and the regional levels and in which health is a shared competence. As a consequence, coordination between governments at different levels is key.