There was learning from other countries, but this was mostly at the level of health experts, exchanging data, models, and health measures, even if expert discussion e.g., on how useful which masks are has also limited learning from others. Contingencies made that learning at the level of running the political, administrative, and managerial machine has been limited. Dynamic learning by doing seems to be relevant, but it needs functioning and fast feedback and accountability mechanisms, quick matching responses, and corrective decisions and actions. One of the socalled solutions, that is, closing borders, resulted in many problems and was implemented inconsistently with exceptions for commuters. The issue was which borders to close for what, and by whom? The European Economic Area is one space with open borders and free movement for people, goods, services, and capital. These free movements are limited across the EU for people nonSchengen countries or when there is a national emergency. Member states are still responsible for external EU borders, which are a complex set of international airports and harbors and physical outer country borders. The European Border and Coast Guard Agency Frontex assists EU member states and Schengenassociated countries e.g., Switzerland in managing these external borders and harmonizing EU border control. Overall, in some cases, the closing border solution was part of symbolic policies by national politicians under pressure to take visible measures for their domestic audiences. In other words, these policies provide another prime example of coronationalism. DecisionMaking What Sustainable Logics to Follow? Within this pandemic crisis, two logics have been followed, and some countries probably changed logics. As a result of scientific debates about how to effectively stop the virus, the herd logic of building collective immunity through spreading the virus in the herd was opposed to the containment logic, which required drastic and immediate quarantine measures to let the virus expire. Italy, France, Germany, and Belgium but also other countries, such as Spain, Switzerland, and Austria followed the containment logic, whereas the United Kingdom and the Netherlands initially followed the herd logic. Sweden took a different approach by, on the one hand, pursuing the containment logic stopping the virus from spreading, in particular by the government issuing official recommendations of conduct, notably to highrisk groups, but, on the other hand, abstaining from restrictive measures, such as lockdowns, and contenting itself with voluntary citizen compliance regarding social distancing and other hygiene precautions. What explains these differences? In the four Napoleonic and classical Continental European countries examined here, the clear separation of state and society and the perceived supremacy of the state visàvis society, which are essential elements of the administrative culture of each country Kuhlmann and Wollmann 2019, 16 et seq., are central to the explanation of the immediate, restrictive, and fairly undisputed approaches to containment. Here, the state quickly took the lead and made tough decisions that restricted citizens freedoms in order to stop the spread of the virus. In the cases of Italy and France, where the virus spread more rapidly, a determined shift toward containment logic can also be explained by the sheer pressure to act as the number of deaths increased. In Belgium and Germany, on the other hand, dramatic news and images from Italy and, to some extent, France supported the strong reactions, first and foremost, of governments at the central level. They were supported by the regional or Länder governments in a coordinated and united way. The more liberal coping with the pandemic that was adopted, at least initially, in the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and Sweden, can presumably be related inter alia to their administrative cultures marked by a less interventionist and hierarchical logic of governmental activities. However, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, after a while, shifted to the containment logic, which can be interpreted as a convergence of pandemic management paradigms. A range of reasons collateral damage getting too high, expert discussions being controversial may explain this shift, although all governments based their decisions on what scientists claimed what was best to do Van Dooren and Noordegraaf 2020. The common containment logic has resulted in a similar mix of shutdowns, lockdowns, contact bans, and event cancellations. Security forces have been responsible for monitoring these measures and punishing noncompliance. The substantial equivalence of the choices made appears to be of particular interest in consideration of the different general modes of crisis management that distinguished the four countries table 2. Whereas the restrictive containment approach represents a convergent trend of coping with the crisis in European countries with Sweden as a remarkable exception, there are major differences in the institutional drivers. A clear distinction can be made between a more regional or decentralized and a more national or centralized logic. In some countries, such as France and Belgium, there was a national strategy from the beginning. In other countries, such as Germany and Italy, there was initially a regional logic, defined in some regions, which then resulted in national political coordination, which then became a national or coordinated strategy of resource allocation and what regions should do at an operational level. Whereas in Germany, the crisisrelated agenda setting and problemsolving started at the local level with functionally strong local public health services and the Länder being responsible for pandemic crisis management, in France and Italy, the central state was the key actor, while local and regional governments played a more or less subordinate role. Belgium took a middle position on the one hand, the regions assumed major functions in crisis management on the other hand, the position of the federation became increasingly pronounced over the course of the crisis. Coordinating How to Make Complex Things Happen through Standardized Solutions or Exceptional Solutions? Implementing logics in an effective way requires coherent operational and managerial standardized practices, such as topdown versus bottomup decisionmaking, coordination of measures, linking of experts and administrators, or linking of administrators and politicians. To streamline multiple actors at multiple levels, a combination of topdown and bottomup dynamics is indispensable. The combinations of modes of crisis management vary among the European countries, from enforced topdown France, to predominantly topdown with operational bottomup Italy, to delegatednegotiatedcoordinated topdown with significant bottomup Belgium and Germany tables 1 and 2. This has allowed the avoidance of a joint decision trap of nondecision, and it has allowed subcentral pilot practices to spread to other parts of the country. Most countries have secured coordination through a central ministry health, interior, or prime minister or a department of an agency civil protection. However, the classic coordination problem of silos remains a point of attention to avoid disconnects. This has been particularly evident with regard to sanitary and public health policies as the number of subjects involved in the legislation and execution is very high, especially in Germany and Italy table 2. In Germany, most of the competencies to respond are at the Länder and local levels. The federal minister of health pledges for the Länder for compliance, and the chancellor pushes for coordinated measures but is not in the position to impose them on the Länder. To achieve nationwide solutions and uniform standards, in Germany, the horizontal selfcoordination of all 16 Länder plus the vertical involvement of the federal level is necessary. The same, more or less, applies to Belgium, a federal state that lacks hierarchy between the national and the regional levels and in which health is a shared competence. As a consequence, coordination between governments at different levels is key. However, standard operating procedures and practices were not sufficient. Special task forces have been established in all countries, based on expert knowledge, risk assessment, operations, or general crises. At the EU level, the Crisis Coordination Committee has been established under the leadership of the commissioner, who is the emergency response coordinator. The EU Civil Protection Mechanism is another recently established disaster management instrument to strengthen cooperation between member states but designed for classical natural disasters. Also, the European Commission coordinates regular contacts between European ministers for health and interior. Coordination by expertise has also been evident. Health experts are at the crossroads of politicians, administrators, and the population at large. Legal burdens, limitations, or restrictions on electronic transfers of data, teleworking, fasttrack processing seem to accelerate and create precedents for future ways of delivering services, implement policies, and taking decisions. However, all European countries wrestle with remaining issues, which cannot be entirely solved by experts or technical committees for coordination, at the national or at EU level, about tensions between policies or allocation of resources and capacity. There are tensions about how to allocate capacity masks, ventilators, personal protective equipment between regions, between hospitals and centers of care homes for senior citizens, handicapped, psychiatric patients, prisons, and between delivery chain or security forces. There are tensions between values and priorities monitoring mobility through mobile technology versus privacy keeping public transport mobility versus restricting mobility. Finally, extraordinary measures such as plenary powers or national emergency powers allow for tackling these very complex, even wicked problems. Communicating Whom to Convince and How? Framing and effective communication require a simple and straightforward logic. To move from monitoring and risk management to grounded decisions that are owned by those who need to implement these measures requires a framing in an official and a general communication strategy. This ownership of the message around a shared objective, contain and stop the spread of the virus, is needed to unite and to mobilize goodwill and resources, supported by traditional old media as well as new social media and to collaborate politically all or most political parties, but also executive with legislative and judicial powers across the public sectorthat is, vertically all levels of governmentand across societythat is horizontally private sector, nongovernmental organizations, and citizens. In all cases, the key official communication was centralized and monopolized by the highest political leadership communicating directly with the population. All speeches by heads of state or government include three components first, enhancing awareness by emphasizing the gravity of the pandemic, the difference from past diseases, and the need for urgent and drastic measures second, providing reassurance of being handson and having the capacity to solve but requesting discipline and support from everybody and third, gratefulness to frontline worke