Pollution is the largest environmental cause of disease and premature death in the world today. Diseases caused by pollution were responsible for an estimated 9 million premature deaths in 201516 of all deaths worldwidethree times more deaths than from AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria combined and 15 times more than from all wars and other forms of violence. In the most severely affected countries, pollutionrelated disease is responsible for more than one death in four. Pollution, health, and the planet time for decisive actionFor decades, pollution and its harmful effects on peoples health, the environment, and the planet have been neglected both by governments and the international development community. Pollution is the largest environmental cause of disease and death in the world today, responsible for an estimated 9 million premature deaths in 2015.1 92 of all pollutionrelated mortality is seen in lowincome and middleincome countries.1 A new Lancet Commission on pollution and health aims to confront and overturn this urgent predicament. FullText PDF Towards a healthier and safer environmentThe Lancet Commission on pollution and health by Philip Landrigan and colleagues1 is an immensely important piece of work highlighting the impact that environmental pollution has on death and disease and the related need to scale up political will if we are to effectively confront this issue. FullText PDF Implications for the science of air pollution and healthThe Lancet Commission on Pollution and Health1 is a landmark in the history of attempts to improve health by reducing exposure to harmful environmental pollution, nearly all of which is created by human activity. This report aims to raise global awareness of pollution, end neglect of pollutionrelated disease, and mobilise resources and the political will needed to effectively confront pollution. The first section of the report describes the health burden attributable to three types of environmental pollution water pollution, air pollution and soil, heavy metal and chemical pollution, the latter including occupational pollutants. FullText PDF Mathuros Ruchirawat leading light in pollution controlBy the time she was in high school, Mathuros Ruchirawat had already figured out her professional calling. Im a scientist at heart, says Ruchirawat, now Professor of Pharmacology and Toxicology at Mahidol University in Thailand and Vice President of Research and Academic Affairs at the Chulabhorn Research Institute CRI where she oversees nine research laboratories. Somehow she also finds time to direct a major research and educational enterprise at Thailands Center of Excellence on Environmental Health and Toxicology EHT. FullText PDF In control of ambient and household air pollution how low should we go?The Lancet Commission on Pollution and Health is a robust call to arms. Stark in its warnings, but brimming with optimism, this report emphasises that pollution is the worlds largest environmental cause of poor health today, responsible for 9 million deaths a year and a large burden of noncommunicable disease, including respiratory, cardiovascular, and neurological impairment. FullText PDF Department of ErrorLandrigan PJ, Fuller R, Acosta NJR, et al.