Such a scenario is not in the interests of the applicant nor in those of her possible successor. 33 He gave the Member States and the Council several days to present their arguments. The Member States and the Court, in a farcical move of aberration of justice, orchestrated an ex parte urgent appeal against a nonfinal interim measure, allowing the Vice President of the Court of Justice to de facto hijack the case and dismiss it as prima facie having no prospects of success. 34 The Greek usurper was installed even before AG Sharpston 2021 learnt about the appeal against Judge Collins order and she was never given a chance to present her case formally again. The Vice President of the Court of Justice was clear that the action of the Member States was a common accord under Article 253 TFEU and was unreviewable no matter what, 35 siding with the abuse of the Courts independence and dismissing outright the basic idea that Article 19 TEU contains the same principles and applies equally to the national and supranational courts alike. The Vice President purported to decide the entire case on an ex parte application against an ex parte freezing order Rozenberg, 2020 which was not final to the end that, in a nutshell, the CJEU does not enjoy independence from the Member States. The outcome of the case was such that the Member States were allowed by the Court absolute room for manœuvre in mingling with the Courts composition including the instances where their intervention was not only ultra vires, but also directly contra legem and making the concerns of Judge Collins of the General Court more acute what is the power of the Courts decisions if its composition as such is tainted by manifest illegality? While the Court of Justice preferred not to say, dismissing all the cases and denying independence to the General Court too, which was de facto preempted by the Vice President of the Court of Justice in the Sharpston cases, 36 the answer based on its own standards of judicial independence, as well as the key caselaw on the matter from the ECtHR is quite clear and alarming a Court open to absolute interference by the sovereign in direct contradiction with the letter and the spirit of the law in a context where such interventions are not reviewable, is not a tribunal established by law in the sense of Xero Flor. Even more, Grzęda indicates that an unlawfully appointed individual taints compliance with Article 61 ECHR, as an impostor cannot adjudicate and the panel is thus improperly composed. It appears, thus, that the CJEU applies a radically different standard of judicial independence to itself the one that directly contradicts its own caselaw related to the PiS attacks on Polish courts and which is in prima facie violation of the ECtHR standard. The new standard of judicial independence established by the Court of Justice in the Sharpston cases is thus the most deficient among all the standards present in the European legal space. It does not only directly contradict the CJEUs own caselaw on irremovability of judges and security of tenure, but also the ECtHR standard, which is more demanding. Speaking openly, the standard comes down to allowing for a carte blanche to unlimited interference by the political powers with the Courts composition in the absence of any references to the law or basic legality. The Sharpston cases are thus a no legality standard. If applied to the Polish Rule of Law situation, the Sharpston standard would have cleared PiS attacks on the independence of the Polish courts as fully legitimate. The most important court in the framework of a project of integration through law thus emerged as falling short of meeting the basic European standards of what is a tribunal established by law an immensely dangerous deficiency. What is particularly puzzling is that it came in the context where the Courts unlawful servility visàvis the Member States was also absolutely unnecessary, given that AG Sharpston had only one year left to serve. For the past one and a half decades the ECtHR has presumed that ECHR obligations are respected when states implement EU law, given that the protection of fundamental rights afforded by the EU was in principle equivalent to that of the Convention system. 37 But the ECtHR also made clear that this Bosphorus presumption is rebuttable, even if the threshold was high. 38 The equivalence in human rights protection can only be rebutted if a manifest deficiency is established. For a long time the presumption proved to be well founded. The multiplication of judicial independence standards in the EU, which now includes several standards in direct contravention of the basic requirements of Article 61 ECHR could mark an unfortunate beginning of a new era. Indeed, when CJEU insists on accepting preliminary references from the bodies not established by law and where the CJEU itself, allows for unchecked unlawful interference by the Member States into its own composition, the question arises whether the principles cherished by the two systems are really the same. Granted, the EU in not a member of the ECHR, yet, the basic adherence to the key principles of Article 61 ECHR as well as own law is still to be expected of the CJEU and this is what is missing from the diverse and incoherent judicial independence picture painted by CJEU in the interests of judicial dialogue, mutual trust and other procedural approaches to EU law. Worse still, there is a set of laws in the area of freedom, security and justice, which were adopted along the principle of mutual trust, and where member states are specifically called upon to lower their scrutiny and almost automatically recognize eachothers decisions. As the CJEU held in Opinion 213 essentially vetoing EU accession to the ECHR, when implementing EU law, Member States may be required to presume that fundamental rights have been observed by all other Member States, meaning that save in exceptional cases, they may not check whether that other Member State has actually, in a specific case, observed the fundamental rights guaran