Potential cases are then handed over to special commissions for further investigation. The German system is highly decentralized with an institutional arrangement at each university. The DFG also advises that primary data should be stored for at least ten years. These regulations will hopefully prevent the repetition of cases such as that of Schön. The regulations adopted by the Max Planck Society MPG Munich, Germany are based on those of the DFG, with an ombudsperson in every institute acting as a confidential advisor when potential violations of good research conduct emerge MPG, 2000. From 1999 to 2004, the Max Planck Institutes reported 22 cases of misconduct to the central office16 in biomedical researchand indepth investigations resulted in severe sanctions in four cases Kreutzberg, 2004. In France, the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale INSERMthe primary agency for medical and healthrelated researchestablished a Committee on Scientific Integrity in 1999 Ankier, 1999 Breittmayer et al, 2000. Allegations are reported to the Scientific Integrity Officer or regional correspondent who, in turn, reports to the INSERM DirectorGeneral. The sequence of events is similar to the USAs ORI, and measures to combat malicious allegations are contemplated. However, in contrast to the UK, where the law protects an employee from victimization or dismissal by an employer, no specific law exists in France to protect whistleblowers. Still, legislation dealing with moral harassment in the workplace might deal with such victimization Ankier, 1999. In Switzerland, the Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences created the Committee for Scientific Integrity in Medical and Biomedical Research in 1999. This Committee has drawn up noncompulsory guidelines on scientific integrity for public and private research institutions SAMS, 2003. In the Netherlands, at the beginning of the last decade, the Dutch Organization for Scientific Research and the Dutch Association of Universities established a committee for scientific integrity to assess institutional procedures and to operate as a fallback mechanism Klasen Overbeke, 2002. Croatia deserves special mention. Its leading medical journal, the Croatian Medical Journal, began cooperation with the ORI in 1999 and its editorial board initiated a dialogue on research integrity with the Croatian Science Ministry Hren, 2002 Petrovecki Scheetz, 2001 the journal took the unusual step of creating a Research Integrity Editor. Furthermore, the country has been actively teaching on topics related to responsible research conduct since 1996 for example, since 2001, medical and PhD students have received instruction in the areas of research integrity and scientific misconduct Petrovecki Scheetz, 2001. The common denominator in scientific misconduct is a failure to foster a culture of research integrity. A US Institute of Medicine committee concluded that, there is a lack of evidence to definitely support any one way to approach the problem of promoting and evaluating research integrity IoM, 2002. While there is indeed no consensus as to whether the approach should be centralized or decentralized Breen, 2003, it is clear that in todays scientific climate, yesterdays attitudes are simply not sustainable. it is clear that in todays scientific climate, yesterdays attitudes are simply not sustainable Centralized and decentralized approaches both have supporters and detractors. The Danes believe that centralizing the system incorporates an independent element at the outset, potentially overcoming resistance from local institutions to initiate inquiries Riis, 2001. In a decentralized scenario, they contend, institutions might display a rebound reaction if serious transgressions are identified to stress the institutions high ethical standards, a rapid tribunal process is put into motion that results in strong punishments without the necessary fair defence for the accused. By contrast, supporters of the decentralized system argue that the actions of individual researchers do not exist in a vacuum but are affected by institutional factors, and that research institutions must be held fully accountable for setting up systems and mentoring processes that foster the integrity of their scientists Cho et al, 2006. A further argument against centralization is that local resistance might be even greater if the move to centralize is perceived as usurping local prerogatives. Some aspects, such as the existence of an ombudsperson, might well be common to both schemes. In a centralized approach, a national or regional ombudsperson might exist not to investigate allegations, but to mitigate the isolation experienced by whistleblowers. Such an ombudsperson, preferably someone with an MD or PhD degree and expertise in the responsible conduct of research, would have no more than advisory authority but could still provide useful advice. Ombudspeople should also be able to advise those who believe they have been falsely accused of misconduct. In a decentralized scheme, local ombudspeople should also be available to anybody seeking advice on questions of scientific misconduct. As happens at the DFG, they would receive allegations but undertake no investigation, handing over any recommendation to an institutionindependent mediator. Another aspect that might be common to both systems is the publication of an annual report detailing the main findings of the monitoring body. Decisions on whether or not to disclose the names of scientists proven to have committed misconduct should take into account the prevailing culture and sensitivities. Additionally, to enforce implementation, research funding agencies and private foundations should make grant decisions contingent on the willingness of institutions to adhere to scientific integrity guidelines ESF, 2000. Recently, Titus et al 2008 recommended six strategies for fostering research integrity, reflecting the efforts of the ORI since its creation. Lamentably, most ORI recommendations such as adopt zero tolerance, protect whistleblowers and train the mentors are still lacking in many European nations Bosch Titus, 2009. Countries without a tradition of reporting misconduct or formal systems for investigating allegations have the opportunity to observe existing models and choose the best one to adopt. The scheme they ultimately chooseand its implementationshould be decided by consensus between all participants the scientists, research institutions, funding agencies and governments. Lamentably, most ORI recommendations such as adopt zero tolerance, protect whistleblowers and train the mentors are still lacking in many European nations The existing legislation should also be analysed.