The methods usedwhich included, among others, an extensive internet and literature search to identify relevant institutionswere suboptimal and the conclusions too optimistic. Moreover, the study itself seemed somewhat flawed as the process concentrated on gathering information from public funding research agencies and learned societies. Because there is a consensus that research institutions are the main guarantors of integrity, it was surprising that universities, research institutions and private funding agencies, such as the Wellcome Trust in the UK, were excluded. Although the report stated that the countries surveyed used a wide range of approaches to deal with integrity, there was no discussion of the variability of standards and no mention of the number of investigations submitted to existing panels. Nevertheless, the ESF report sets out guidelines for research integrity and contains useful information about the recent efforts of various countries to promote integrity guidelines. In 2004, the Slovak Research and Development Agency pragmatically adopted the rigorous recommendations of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG Bonn, Germany for safeguarding good scientific practice. Interestingly, in Croatia, it is mainly due to efforts of the editorial board of the Croatian Medical Journal that, in 2006, following the reform of the higher education legislation, a National Committee for Ethics in Science and Higher Education CESHE was established to investigate allegations of misconduct brought to its attention ESF, 2008. But what is the extent of scientific misconduct in Europe? At first glance, it might seem that it occurs more frequently in northern Europe and is virtually absent in southern countries Bosch 2007, 2008, although this impression might simply reflect a lack of reporting and monitoring in Mediterranean countries. In Spain, for example, most research institutions have no codes of scientific integrity and no policies to handle misconduct. By contrast, UK universities do have specific procedures, even though they are rarely used Farthing, 2004. Some have suggested that most European countries tend to conceal individual cases of fraud owing to a lack of precise rules Coker McKee, 2001, but the actual situation might well be polarized in countries with no tradition of monitoring scientific integrity, research misconduct might be far more common than in those with established standards. The historian Horace F. Judson asserted that fraud is intrinsic in cultures that are characterized by secrecy, privilege, and lack of accountability Judson, 2004. These features are indeed prevalent in some European research organizations that lack transparency Bosch, 2002 Anonymous, 1998 Gui et al, 2002 it has been noted that Russia maintains a tolerant attitude to violations of ethical principles and falsification in research Vlasov, 2002. In Poland, a highprofile case of mass plagiarism led to the proposal of national, independent committees for scientific misconduct, with the power to initiate and conduct investigations Wronski, 1998 Zawadzki Abbasi, 1998 yet it has been reported that Polish scientists might be protected from accusation or prosecution Rivoire, 2003. The fact remains that the real extent of misconduct in Europe is still unknown, inadequately investigated and possibly concealed. In what follows, I present a brief account of how different nations have tried to deal with the problem. The fact remains that the real extent of misconduct in Europe is still unknown, inadequately investigated and possibly concealed The Scandinavian countries were the first in Europe to draw up regulations to address scientific misconduct Riis, 1999 Farthing, 2004 ORI, 1999. These regulations, which were drafted in the early 1990s, include guidelines for good scientific practice and the promotion of scientific integrity, definitions of dishonesty, and procedures and bodies to prevent, detect, investigate and punish misconduct when it occurs Nylenna et al, 1999. Moreover, the education of scientists in good research practice has become mandatory for PhD students and senior scientists Riis, 1999. In addition, regulations protect whistleblowers from unfair victimization Ankier, 2002. Denmark has a centralized monitoring system based at the Ministry of Science, its Committee on Scientific Dishonestythe members of which are qualified in scientific and legal mattersis directly responsible for investigating misconduct allegations that involve both publicly and privately sponsored research. In 1997, the Committee set up three subcommittees to deal specifically with problems in the medical sciences natural, agricultural and veterinary sciences and social sciences and humanities. Cases can be brought to the attention of the committees by whistleblowers, institutions or the Committee itself, and to ensure harmonization, all three subcommittees have a joint chairperson, who is also a High Court judge. In one of five instances of alleged misconduct that were considered by the medical science subcommittee in 2004, the researcher against whom a complaint had been brought was found to have acted dishonestly. Norway has adopted the Danish model of independent national bodies, whereas Swedens system is a mixture of decentralized and centralized bodies Riis, 1999 Nylenna et al, 1999. In Finland, the system is fully decentralized the guidelines produced in 1994 by the countrys National Research Ethics Council state that universities and research institutions are responsible for preventing all forms of scientific misconduct and for investigating allegations Nylenna et al, 1999. As such, a suspicion of misconduct is first reported to the rector of the university or the director of the research institute. Estimates from the Scandinavian countries indicate that the prevalence of misconduct is 12 cases per million inhabitants, of which only 1 in 5 are serious casesmainly fabrication, falsification and plagiarism Riis, 1999. In the UK, the Medical Research Council was the first institution to publish rules for correct conduct in research, according to which, allegations are to be handled by the individual institutions involved Ankier, 2002. Significant changes are expected after the recent establishment of the UK Panel for Research Integrity in Health and Biomedical Sciences Cole, 2006, which aims to offer advice and support to staff and employers in the National Health Service and at universities. The Committee on Publication Ethicsa group of medical journal editors who represent 346 journalshad an important role in applying pressure to the British government to put scientific misconduct on the national agenda and to create the Panel COPE, 2005, which now offers a training programme, has a public information agenda and hears complaints from whistleblowers. However, the Panel is not responsible for investigating allegations. Instead, it passes the matter to the relevant research institution, requesting it to investigate. It is worth pointing out that the pharmaceutical industrya major supporter of medical research in the UKis helping to fund the new panel Anonymous, 2006. Although the activities of the Panel are intended to be independent of sponsors, it remains to be seen whether pharmaceutical industry funding will undermine public trust in the new body, especially in the light of recent allegations that drug companies have concealed adverse drug effects in clinical trials Curfman et al, 2006. However, the UK drug industry has conducted its own investigations into misconduct, and the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry has identified a significant number of cases Jones, 2002. In Germany and France, national research organizations and funding agencies manage preventive and corrective measures. The DFG adopted recommendations on misconduct in 1997 and compelled all research institutions to implement rules, or risk being ruled ineligible for DFG grants DFG, 1998 Bostanci, 2002 Torkar, 2002. Under DFG rules, German research institutions must have independent ombudspeople that are alerted to suspected cases of misconduct. Potential cases are then handed over to special commissions for further investigation. The German system is highly decentralized with an institutional arrangement at each university. The DFG also advises that primary data should be stored for at least ten years. These regulations will hopefully prevent the repetition of cases such as that of Schön. The regulations adopted by the Max Planck Society MPG Munich, Germany are based on those of the DFG, with an ombudsperson in every institute acting as a confidential advisor when potential violations of good research conduct emerge MPG, 2000. From 1999 to 2004, the Max Planck Institutes reported 22 cases of misconduct to the central office16 in biomedical researchand indepth investigations resulted in severe sanctions in four cases Kreutzberg, 2004. In France, the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale INSERMthe primary agency for medical and healthrelated researchestablished a Committee on Scientific Integrity in 1999 Ankier, 1999 Breittmayer et al, 2000. Allegations are reported to the Scientific Integrity Officer or regional correspondent who, in turn, reports to the INSERM DirectorGeneral. The sequence of events is similar to the USAs ORI, and measures to combat malicious allegations are contemplated. However, in contrast to the UK, where the law protects an employee from victimization or dismissal by an employer, no specific law exists in France to protect whistleblowers. Still, legislation dealing with moral harassment in the workplace might deal with such victimization Ankier, 1999. In Switzerland, the Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences created the Committee for Scientific Integrity in Medical and Biomedical Research in 1999. This Committee has drawn up noncompulsory guidelines on scientific integrity for public and private research institutions SAMS, 2003. In the Netherlands, at the beginning of the last decade, the Dutch Organization for Scientific Research and the Dutch Association of Universities established a committee for scientific integrity to assess institutional procedures and to operate as a fallback mechanism Klasen Overbeke, 2002. Croatia deserves special mention. Its leading medical journal, the Croatian Medical Journal, began cooperation with the ORI in 1999 and its editorial board initiated a dialogue on research integrity with the Croatian Science Ministry Hren, 2002 Petrovecki Scheetz, 2001 the journal took the unusual step of creating a Research Integrity Editor. Furthermore, the country has been actively teaching on topics related to responsible research conduct since 1996 for example, since 2001, medical and PhD students have received instruction in the areas of research integrity and scientific misconduct Petrovecki Scheetz, 2001. The common denominator in scientific misconduct is a failure to foster a culture of research integrity. A US Institute of Medicine committee concluded that, there is a lack of evidence to definitely support any one way to approach the problem of promoting and evaluating research integrity IoM, 2002. While there is indeed no consensus as to whether the approach should be centralized or decentralized Breen, 2003, it is clear that in todays scientific climate, yesterdays attitudes are simply not sustainable. it is clear that in todays scientific climate, yesterdays attitudes are simply not sustainable Centralized and decentralized approaches both have supporters and detractors. The Danes believe that centralizing the system incorporates an independent element at the outset, potentially overcoming resistance from local institutions to initiate inquiries Riis, 2001. In a decentralized scenario, they contend, institutions might display a rebound reaction if serious transgressions are identified to stress the institutions high ethical standards, a rapid tribunal process is put into motion that results in strong punishments without the necessary fair defence for the accused. By contrast, supporters of the decentralized system argue that the actions of individual researchers do not exist in a vacuum but are affected by institutional factors, and that research institutions must be held fully accountable for setting up systems and mentoring processes that foster the integrity of their scientists Cho et al, 2006. A further argument against centralization is that local resistance might be even greater if the move to centralize is perceived as usurping local prerogatives. Some aspects, such as the existence of an ombudsperson, might well be common to both schemes. In a centralized approach, a national or regional ombudsperson might exist not to investigate allegations, but to mitigate the isolation experienced by whistleblowers. Such an ombudsperson, preferably someone with an MD or PhD degree and expertise in the responsible conduct of research, would have no more than advisory authority but could still provide useful advice. Ombudspeople should also be able to advise those who believe they have been falsely accused of misconduct. In a decentralized scheme, local ombudspeople should also be available to anybody seeking advice on questions of scientific misconduct. As happens at the DFG, they would receive allegations but undertake no investigation, handing over any recommendation to an institutionindependent mediator. Another aspect that might be common to both systems is the publication of an annual report detailing the main findings of the monitoring body. Decisions on whether or not to disclose the names of scientists proven to have committed misconduct should take into account the prevailing culture and sensitivities. Additionally, to enforce implementation, research funding agencies and private foundations should make grant decisions contingent on the willingness of institutions to adhere to scientific integrity guidelines ESF, 2000. Recently, Titus et al 2008 recommended six strategies for fostering research integrity, reflecting the efforts of the ORI since its creation. Lamentably, most ORI recommendations such as adopt zero tolerance, protect whistleblowers and train the mentors are still lacking in many European nations Bosch Titus, 2009. Countries without a tradition of reporting misconduct or formal systems for investigating allegations have the opportunity to observe existing models and choose the best one to adopt. The scheme they ultimately chooseand its implementationshould be decided by consensus between all participants the scientists, research institutions, funding agencies and governments. Lamentably, most ORI recommendations such as adopt zero tolerance, protect whistleblowers and train the mentors are still lacking in many European nations The existing legislation should also be analysed. European countries have different judicial traditions that, in most cases, are not adapted to deal with cases of scientific misconduct. However, there are some exceptions. For example, serious scientific misconduct is a reason for dismissal from service under the civil service law of Lower Saxony in Germany, meaning that extraordinary termination of employment with the Max Planck Society might be justified after an instance of misconduct MPG, 2000. In the absence of appropriate legislation, internal regulations might offer consensual solutions through conciliation or arbitration, as contemplated by the DFG. Between 1990 and 2005, the number of international collaborations, measured by coauthorship of refereed papers, grew linearly, but the number of international addresses grew exponentially. This partly reflects collaborations between researchers from countries where procedures for overseeing ethics and investigating misconduct are embryonic or simply lacking. The rise in multiple authorships reflects the multidisciplinary, collaborative character of modern research Mishkin, 1998. Yet, a lack of homogeneity in monitoring research means that when misconduct allegations appear, authors from different countries are being treated differently. One way to ensure that all coauthors are treated fairly would be to establish a common European policy on scientific dishonesty with uniform procedures for violations Riis, 2001 Mishkin, 1998. International cooperation in Europeand between Europe and the USAmight also tackle the problem that arises when scientists relocateafter having committed misconductto countries where employers might be unaware of their previous record. Technological advances, especially the burgeoning impact of the internet on scientific discourse and comment, mean that the selfinterest of countries demands a common pathway for addressing allegations of scientific misconduct and ensuring transparent research outcomes. One way to ensure that all coauthors are treated fairly would be to establish a common European policy on scientific dishonesty with uniform procedures for violations Although heterogeneous in nature, influential national and European academic societies and associations might work out principles of good scientific practice for their area of expertise and make them binding on their members. In addition, PanEuropean research funding bodiesnotably the EC and the European Research Council ERCmight set up regulatory mechanisms and compel institutions to create and enforce research integrity rules and procedures for handling allegations of scientific misconduct. The EC and the ESF are well suited to create a panel of scientists who could act as independent experts in inquiries and investigations of misconduct related to projects financed by the EC framework research programmes and the ERC. These bodies might also take the lead in describing standards and goals. The appropriate granting of jurisdiction is also an essential requirement to make the system work by recognizing a research agencys right to enforce its actions. The EC might also determine whether any agreedupon definition of misconduct should be broadly or narrowly based. As a first step, the EC might ask its advisory European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to draw up an opinion paper with recommendations. The appropriate granting of jurisdiction is also an essential requirement to make the system work by recognizing a research agencys right to enforce its actions The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OECD Paris, France is currently studying how to encourage good research standards and how to ensure commitment from all parties to investigate misconduct and cooperate in investigations. Inevitably, change will require European countries to adopt OECD guidance or something similar. However, it is doubtful that harmonized standards alone will have much impact. The lessons learned by the US Food and Drug Administration when they brought together Europe, Japan and the USA along with the pharmaceutical industry to set international standards for approving new drug applications might be a useful starting point to study successful efforts to harmonize regulations. Forging universal standards will be a longterm commitment that requires resources and participation from organizations such as the OECD, ESF and ORI to strengthen international collaborations and research integrity. Some of these issues will be discussed during the Second World Conference on Research Integrity, to be held in Singapore in July 2010. It would also be useful to advance towards an agreedupon definition of scientific misconduct, which is urgently needed to unify authority across various countries in order for progress to be made. Punishment makes no sense without prevention, and prevention of research misconduct is necessary because selfregulation is unlikely to be effective Bosch, 2008. With an overall budget of more than 51 billion, European authorities should not miss the opportunity to protect the Seventh Framework Research Programto run from 2007 to 2013and the ERC against this type of scientific crime. Conflict of Interest The author declares that he has no conflict of interest. Biography Xavier Bosch is at the Department of Internal Medicine at the Hospital Clinic and the Institut dInvestigacions Biomèdiques August Pí i Sunyer, University of Barcelona, Spain. Email email protected References Altman LK 1995 The doctors world revisionist history sees Pasteur as liar who stole rivals ideas. New York Times 16 MayGoogle Scholar Anderson C 1993 Pasteur notebooks reveal deception. Science 259 1117CrossrefCASPubMedWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar Ankier SI 2002 Dishonesty, misconduct and fraud in clinical research an international problem. J Int Med Res 30 357365CrossrefCASPubMedWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar Anonymous 1998 Spanish universities and the obstacles to development. Nature 396 709Google Scholar Anonymous 2004 Physicist Schön stripped of doctorate. Nature 429 692Google Scholar Anonymous 2006 UK unleashes watchdog to enforce research integrity. Nature 440 980981Google Scholar Bostanci A 2002 Germany gets in step with scientific misconduct rules. Science 296 1778CrossrefCASPubMedWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar Bosch X 2002 Spanish universities reforms spark more jobsand protests. Science 295 781782CrossrefCASPubMedWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar Bosch X 2007 Dealing with scientific misconduct. BMJ 335 524525CrossrefPubMedWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar Bosch X 2008 Integrity Croatias standards unusual in much of Europe. Nature 454 574CrossrefCASWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar Bosch X, Titus SL 2009 Cultural challenges and international research integrity. Lancet 373 610612CrossrefPubMedWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar Breen KJ 2003 Misconduct in medical research whose responsibility? Intern Med J 33 186191Wiley Online LibraryCASPubMedWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar Breittmayer JP et al 2000 Responding to allegations of scientific misconduct the procedure at the French National Medical and Health Research Institute. Sci Eng Ethics 6 4148CrossrefCASPubMedWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar Cho MK, McGee G, Magnus D 2006 Lessons of the stem cell scandal. Science 311 614615CrossrefCASPubMedWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar Cole A 2006 UK launches panel to tackle research misconduct. BMJ 332 871CrossrefPubMedWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar Coker R, McKee M 2001 Ethical approval for health research in central and eastern Europe an international survey. Clin Med 1 197199CrossrefCASWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar COPE 2005 The COPE Report 2005. Farnborough, UK Committee on Publication EthicsGoogle Scholar Curfman GD, Morrissey S, Drazen JM 2006 Expression of concern reaffirmed. N Engl J Med 354 1193CrossrefCASPubMedWeb of ScienceGoogle Scholar DFG 1998 Recommendations of the Commission on Professional Self Regulation in Science. Bonn, Germany Deutsche ForschungsgemeinschaftGoogle Scholar Durrani M 2003 Research conduct Konstanz clears Schön.