ConstellationsEarly View ORIGINAL ARTICLEOpen Access What is democratic backsliding? Fabio Wolkenstein, Corresponding Author Fabio Wolkenstein email protected Department of Political Science, University of Vienna, Austria Correspondence Fabio Wolkenstein, Department of Political Science, University of Vienna, Universitätsstraße 7, 1010 Vienna, Austria. Email email protectedSearch for more papers by this author Fabio Wolkenstein, Corresponding Author Fabio Wolkenstein email protected Department of Political Science, University of Vienna, Austria Correspondence Fabio Wolkenstein, Department of Political Science, University of Vienna, Universitätsstraße 7, 1010 Vienna, Austria. Email email protectedSearch for more papers by this author First published 11 May 2022 httpsdoi.org10.111114678675.12627AboutSectionsPDF ToolsRequest permissionExport citationAdd to favoritesTrack citation ShareShare Give accessShare full text accessShare fulltext accessPlease review our Terms and Conditions of Use and check box below to share fulltext version of article.I have read and accept the Wiley Online Library Terms and Conditions of UseShareable LinkUse the link below to share a fulltext version of this article with your friends and colleagues. Learn more.Copy URL Share a linkShare onFacebookTwitterLinkedInRedditWechat Much recent political commentary suggests that a backlash, revolt, or counterrevolution is unfolding against liberal constitutional democracy e.g., Eatwell Goodwin, 2018 Galston, 2020 Mounk, 2018 Norris Inglehart, 2019 Zielonka, 2018. As a generalizable observation about contemporary politics, this diagnosis is perhaps unduly alarmist e.g., Przeworski, 2019. In some countries, however, sustained attacks on democratic institutions have indeed become commonplace. An emblematic example is the Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbáns attempts to transform his country into an illiberal democracy. Attentive to the weakness of domestic opposition and supranational democracy monitoring, Orbán, and his Fidesz party have gradually dismantled Hungarys post1989 constitutional order. In its place has arisen a regime that is not outright dictatorial, yet less than democraticsomething that may also be said about Turkey under Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Poland after the electoral victory of Jarosław Kaczyńskis PiSparty in 2015. Scholars routinely reach for the analytical frame of democratic backsliding to describe such phenomena. But though the term is widely used across different disciplines, its precise meaning has rarely been made the subject of sustained reflection. As one leading comparative politics scholar notes, the notion of democratic backsliding is frequently used but rarely analyzed Bermeo, 2016, p. 5 Reacting to this, my aim in this article is to clarify the meaning of democratic backsliding. The ambition, in particular, is to develop a more general account of democratic backsliding that can be applied across a range of different institutional contexts. I begin by running through existing attempts to conceptualize democratic backsliding, noting that much of the existing research either under or overdetermines the concept. The second section deals with the fact that the notion of backsliding implies regression, which in turn raises complicated philosophical issues concerning the accurate identification of progressive and regressive social phenomena. The remainder of the paper is devoted to developing a theoretical account of democratic backsliding that neither under nor overdetermines the concept, and that can satisfactorily explain democratic regressions. Taking its cues from work in the tradition of critical theory, the account comes with a broadly framed distinction between rightssuspending and rightsobstructing forms of democratic backsliding. I discuss and illustrate this distinction and offer some reflections on how backsliding may usefully be analyzed using immanent critique. 1 UNDER AND OVERDETERMINATION Most conceptually oriented contributions to the literature on democratic backsliding focus on the techniques and strategies that political actors employ to attack democracy. These include, but are not limited to, coups détat, executive aggrandizement, and the strategic manipulations of elections e.g., Bermeo, 2016 Daly, 2019 Galston, 2020 Haggard Kaufman, 2021 Khaitan, 2019a Levitsky Ziblatt, 2018 Lust Waldner, 2015 Runciman, 2018 Waldner Lust, 2018.1 A further conceptual feature of democratic backsliding that is frequently highlighted is that it occurs through a discontinuous series of incremental actions, not a onetime coup de grâce Waldner Lust, 2018, p. 95. A politys sliding away from democracy is typically a process, not a clean, revolutionary break with the past. If the concrete actions and events that transform democratic regimes into less democratic or outright nondemocratic ones are relatively wellanalyzed, the quite fundamental conceptual question of how exactly we can tell that a democracy has stopped being a democracy is rarely discussed. Most accounts limit themselves to brief, stipulative definitions along the lines of Backsliding makes elections less competitive without entirely undermining the electoral mechanism Waldner Lust, 2018, p. 95 or to cite a quite different definition of democratic backsliding backsliding denotes the stateled debilitation or elimination of any of the political institutions that sustain an existing democracy Bermeo, 2016, p. 5.