In all countries, the most important initiatives were taken only when the number of reported casesand deathsbegan to increase, and public awareness grew accordingly. During this delay, the national institutions began to prepare, although there was no common practice of testing that allowed the identification of the exact number of contaminations. Notwithstanding these similarities, there are also important differences to be observed among the four countries with respect to the activation of formal risk management procedures. Although they all declared a pandemic emergency of national concern, this was the case at an early stage in France and Italy January INSEE, Ministère des Solidarités et de Santé and Santé Publique France 2020, 2. In Belgium, the COVID19 outbreak was officially called a pandemic in early February. In Germany, because of initially lacking legal provisions in this regard, the declaration was only made by the federal parliament by end of March when the peak of the crisis was already over. In France and Italy, centralized risk management procedures and structures were activated only after numbers became visible, whereas in Germany, no such centralized structures were available and the establishment of crisis task forces had to go from the bottom up table 1. In Belgium, a threestep containment plan was introduced before the first contamination reached the country, but it largely failed as it was very quickly overtaken by the numbers. Monitoring systems have been set up and evolved very differently, depending on the policy and intensity of testing, organizational coverage hospitals, centers of care, private homes, the geographic perimeter regional versus national, and the procedures for data collection centralized versus decentralized. Overall, coordination of monitoring systems at the EU level was clearly lacking. From this comparative observation, we can conclude that the multilevel administrative setting in the four countries has had an important influence on the activation and functioning of risk management procedures. Learning from Whom? How to Put Effective Practices and Operations in Place Since the first cases emerged, European countries have learned from past crises by implementing crisis management systems and processes that have been adopted from other countries, but also by adapting these systems and processes for each local context. Almost all European countries have gone through a number of health and other crises and developed readiness plans. In Germany, there is a history of managing floods 2003 and influenza 2009 and 201718, and operational emergency plans and risk analyses have been available since 2013 for pandemics and floods. However, in reality, these plans were not practiced and were not linked to risk management. In France, during periods of major crises, such as the terror attacks in 2015 Charlie Hebdo or sanitary crises such as several heat waves in 2003, 2006, and 2019, the central government takes over and starts running the system. In Italy, the Civil Protection Department has a long history of crisis intervention in earthquakes 1976 in Friuli, 1980 in Irpinia, 1997 in Umbria, 2009 in LAquila, 2012 in Emilia Romagna, and 2016 in Lazio and floods 1994 in Piemonte, 1998 in Campania, 2000 in Piemonte, but not in health crises. In Belgium, the dioxine crisis 1999, influenza crises 2007, 200910, and a terrorist attack March 2016 positioned action and response plans. All these experiences have resulted in different approaches to disaster management table 2. For instance, the Italian Civil Protection Department consolidated experiences in crisis management, but at the same time, it has never directly managed a big pandemic. Neither have the corresponding actors in other European countries. Table 2. Institutional Design for Governing Health Crises in Four European Countries Belgium France Germany Italy Legalinstitutional foundation of sanitary and public health policies and their implementation Legislation on sanitary and public health issues Federal legislation for hospitals regional legislation for homes for care elderly, disabled etc. National code of public health white plan plan blanc plan Federal Infection Protection Law IfSG Länder legislation on regional hospitals and public health institutions National legislation on essential levels of assistance and financial resources reallocation regional policy making and legislation Execution of sanitary and public health issues hospital management Federal Public Service ministry for Health, Food Chain Safety, and Environment regional ministries and agencies Regional Health Agencies Agences regionals de santé, ARS managements of public state regional, local universities hospitals and private clinics Länder and local execution of federal IfSG Länderlevel hospital plansfinancing Länder and local management of hospitals Regional government, local health authorities, and local private hospitals steered by regional government National Institutes for Healthcare Risk and disaster management pandemic mitigationcontainment measures Disaster management Federal minister for interior national disaster plans civil protection provincial governors provincial disaster plans local government mayors local disaster plans Ministry of the Interior National crisis center for civil protection in peace times in coronavirus times, prime minister and ministerial cabinet national restricted defense and security council headed by the state president Länder competency for civil protection in peace times local management of disasters in coronavirus crisis, predominantly local health authorities National Civil Protection Agencyindependent organization inside the presidency of Ministers Council Declaration of pandemic emergency of national concern federal competency nationalfederal coordination when two or more provinces are involved, or provincial competence is insufficient Amendment of sanitary code by new part on sanitary emergency sanitary emergency can be declared by the ministerial cabinet for two months and can be prolonged with approval of parliament So far no legal provision newly introduced during the Corona crisis by the Federal government with parliamentary approval Ministers Council resolution adopted according to the existing legislation without Parliamentary approval January 31, first two cases of Chinese tourist in Rome.