While Switzerland is not a member state of the European Union EU, it is strongly influenced by the European integration process. Since the referendum on the European Economic Area EEA in 1992, the relationship with the EU has been at the top of the political agenda, and Swiss citizens have been repeatedly asked to vote on EUrelated issues.1 Switzerlands European policy has remained a highly controversial issue all along, and it has strongly contributed to the redefinition of the cleavage structure and to changes in electoral competition and party system Kriesi et al. 2008. During the last two decades, Switzerland has concluded more than 15 bilateral agreements in various policy fields. It has thus reached a level of integration that can be characterized as customized quasimembership Kriesi and Trechsel 2008 189. This, in turn, has had farreaching consequences at the domestic level. Switzerland is, therefore, a case worth considering for scholars interested in the Europeanization of policymaking. Not surprisingly, then, there are countless contributions on the impact of EUrelated factors on Swiss politics and policy outputs for an overview see Fischer 2007. Twenty years after the popular rejection of the EEA, it is time to take stock of these contributions and to make their findings available to a wider audience. What do we know about the Europeanization of Swiss policymaking? This is the opening question of this debate. The international literature on Europeanization has demonstrated a strong preference for qualitative studies over quantitative studies Exadaktylos and Radaelli 2012b. This also holds for Switzerland. A number of smallN studies2 have provided insights into the effects on Swiss decisionmaking processes and on related power relations, conflict and coalition among domestic actors. Legal scholars, for their part, have discussed how and to which extent EU norms influence the Swiss legal order Epiney 2009. LargeN studies are scarcer, and they have mainly focused on legislation. More specifically, authors have adopted a quantitative approach to measure how much Swiss legislation is Europeanized, and to establish causal links between EU factors and domestic policies Arbia 2008, Gava and Varone 2012, Jenni 2013, Kohler 2009, Linder et al. 2009, Mallepell 1999. While Switzerland is strongly integrated in the EU, it still stands apart as a nonEU and nonEEA country. In a comparative perspective, it thus offers variation on a crucial institutional variable, namely nonmembership to these two European supranational organizations. Switzerland appears consequently as a valuable control case for crossnational inquiries that aim at identifying the effects of the EU on national political systems and outcomes Bartle 2006, Fontana et al. 2008, Haverland 2007, LeviFaur 2004. Differences in the extent of Europeanization within the country, with some policy fields strongly affected and others largely immune from EUdriven influence, further motivate the comparison of Europeanization effects across policy fields in Switzerland e.g. Papadopoulos 2008, Sciarini et al. 2004. In the EU, there is a strong preference for studying the policy effects of Europeanization, whereas there is definitely less intellectual appetite for appraising the politics dimension Exadaktylos and Radaelli 2012a 24. Switzerland tends to depart in that respect as several studies have dealt with decisionmaking processes and have focused on the related politics and, to some extent, polity dimensions. Against this background, the purpose of this Debate is threefold. First, we wish to provide scholars with the opportunity to present and wrap up the main results of their work on Europeanization. Second, we wish to invite them to exchange their respective findings, and to engage in a fruitful dialogue regarding which theoretical and empirical lessons can be drawn from the existing literature, and where we should go from there. Third, we wish to give nonSwiss scholars the opportunity to comment on the Swiss literature, to highlight its strengths and weaknesses in a comparative perspective, and to put forward recommendations for the future. To this end, we have asked contributors to this Debate to address the four following questions Not all contributors were able to answer these four questions. However, for the sake of consistency we thought it was worth starting with an ambitious purpose and asking contributors to do their best to address the same set of questions. NonSwiss scholars were then invited to react and to elaborate on the insights provided by the Swiss contributors. The first question addresses conceptual and methodological issues. While most authors agree that Europeanization is a process and not an outcome variable Exadaktylos and Radaelli 2012a, they disagree on how to define Europeanization and on how to study the impact of this process at the domestic level. In this Debate, and in line with the bulk of Swiss literature, we focus primarily on the Europeanization of policymaking and related outputs. This means that we give priority to these dimensions, but contributors were invited to address politics and polity impacts under question 4 below. Authors first presented how they have defined their dependent variable, and how they have measured the EUinduced effects. This is not a trivial issue. Studies with too diverging dependent variables might run the risk to talk past each other and to hinder the development of cumulative knowledge. In her review of nonSwiss, quantitative studies mapping the domestic consequences of EU policies, Töller 2012 highlights some key definitional issues for the study of policy outputs. First, how can we measure policy creation, policy changes andor policy continuity induced by Europeanization? Most empirical studies tend to equate Europeanization with policy change. But it is also worthwhile considering policy stability or continuity as one possible outcome of Europeanization. This is in particular the case when the legislator deliberately decides not to support a policy proposal that would be incompatible with EU norms or that would render the domestic rule less compatible with the EU norm. Given that they resort to comprehensive datasets and long timeperiods, quantitative approaches may privilege simplified measures of Europeanization and policy change. In contrast, comparative case studies may analyze the substantive content of policies more in depth policy objectives, instruments, implementation arrangements, etc., but face the challenges of case selection and external validity. Second, Europeanization scholars adopting quantitative approaches have resorted to legislation to assess the EUs influence on domestic policies. Assessing policy outputs by means of legislation has two major advantages it allows for a quantification of Europeanization processes and outputs, and it facilitates comparison across countries and sectors over time see Brouard et al. 2012. However, to what extent is legislation a pertinent proxy for public policy? This may make sense for regulatory policies, but much less so for policies where EU effects are hardly traceable, such as budgetary policy. Third, through which kinds of legislation does Europeanization exert its influence on domestic policies? Does Europeanization occur through primary legislation i.e. constitutional amendments, international treaties, and federal laws and decrees, enacted by Parliament and subject to referendum? Is it more of a technocratic process taking place behind the scenes in the form of secondary legislation i.e. through government ordinances, regulatory decisions made by independent agencies? This raises the more general question regarding the mechanisms of Europeanization Knill and Lehmkuhl 2002. Further, what about soft law, which may have a dramatic impact on public policies, as demonstrated by the emblematic example of the Bologna reform in higher education policy? While the three previous points may particularly concern scholars interested in policy outputs, those privileging policy processes also face significant challenges. How to measure the degree of Europeanization of domestic policymaking? How can we distinguish decisionmaking processes that are Europeanized from those that are not? Which criteria may help us to draw the line between the two types of processes? In this regard, can we expect to grasp degrees of Europeanization? The second research question addressed in this Debate concerns the variations of Europeanization across policy domains, and the changes in the scope of Europeanization across time Do we actually observe significant differences between policy domains and periods? And what are the underlying explanatory factors? For example, does the extent of Europeanization vary according to the degree of export orientation of a policy sector or according to the rhythm and agenda of negotiations with the EU? These subquestions are important for both academic and political reasons. In media and partisan circles, the Delors myth is still very vivid according to the famous claim of the former President of the EC Commission, 80 of national lawproduction related to economics in EU members states originates at the European level.3 This mythical figure continues to be echoed without strong empirical support König and Mäder 2008. A recent study compared the share of Europeanized domestic laws in eight EU countries Austria, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Spain across 19 policy areas and over the period 19862007 Brouard et al. 2012. The average impact of EU activities on domestic legislation is far lower than suggested by Delors it ranges from 14 in France to 26 in Austria. Variations between policy domains are also considerable. Policy sectors like Law, Macroeconomics, Government Operations, Agriculture, Banking Finance, and Environment are much more influenced by the EU than Defense, Housing, and Social Welfare. Finally, there is a clear trend towards a higher Europeanization of domestic laws over time. The issue of the EUs influence on the Swiss legal order and policies has special democratic relevance given the absence of Switzerlands participation in EU decisionmaking processes. The level of Europeanization of Swiss policies has naturally attracted the attention of academics and policymakers alike. For instance, MPs have more than once requested the Federal Council to provide figures on the proportion of Swiss legislation influenced by the EU.4 The Federal Council has acknowledged the lack of information and the inherent difficulties of establishing such a systematic inventory.5 Despite the Governments reticence, in September 2013 the National Council finally adopted a postulate formally inviting the Federal Council to consider the issue. The present Debate takes on this challenge. Of course, we do not claim that it will provide a definitive answer to concerns raised by MPs. Nevertheless, it offers a systematic overview of findings from empirical studies assessing Europeanization impacts on Swiss policies during the last decades. At the time of writing, Swiss empirical research on Europeanization has essentially focused on the 1990s and 2000s. Unfortunately, the inherent timelag proper to data collection, analysis and publication processes renders difficult the assessment of how relatively recent events, such as the financial or the Eurozone crises, affected the Europeanization of Swiss policymaking. In other words, on the basis of current empirical research it is too early to tell if, and to what extent, trends have changed during these last particularly turbulent years. Despite these limitations, the existing scholarship is able to provide a good picture of how Europeanization has varied at different critical moments of SwissEU relations. While Europeanization exerts its influence beyond the EU Lavenex and Schimmelfennig 2009 and even beyond Europe Schimmelfennig 2007 it is especially relevant for a country like Switzerland that is located in the middle of the continent and that is strongly dependent on its economic relationships with the EU. During the last five decades, Switzerland has followed the socalled third way between full EU membership and isolation, i.e. a way aiming to maximize the economic gains associated with access to the European market while minimizing the related political costs. To that end, Switzerland has relied on a twofold strategy. On the one hand, it has negotiated agreements with the EU on a bilateral basis. This is the socalled direct form of Europeanization. On the other hand, however, the country has also adapted unilaterally to existing EU rules. In Switzerland, this indirect form of Europeanization is also known as autonomous adaptation autonomer Nachvollzug. As a founding member of the European Free Trade Association EFTA, Switzerland concluded a Free Trade Agreement FTA on manufactured goods with the European Community EC in 1972, which became the cornerstone of the SwissEC relationship for the following fifteen years. Reacting to the EC plan to create a Single European Market based on the four EC freedoms free circulation of goods, capital, services and people, EFTA countries negotiated the EEA. While the EEA agreement offered them access to the single market, it did not grant them full codecision rights. As a result, the Swiss Government accepted the EEA agreement but applied, in parallel, for full membership to the EC. However, the popular rejection of the EEA agreement on 6 December 1992 forced the Swiss Government to revise its policy line, and to revert to bilateral sectoral negotiations with the EU Dupont and Sciarini 2001. The first round of bilateral agreements, covering seven sectors, was concluded in 1999 and ratified by Swiss citizens in 2000 Dupont and Sciarini 2007. The second round of bilateral talks resulted in nine additional agreements Afonso and Maggetti 2007.6 Although new negotiations on various topics have taken place with some having already ended since 2008, the whole process is currently on hold. Until recently, the lack of agreement on highly controversial institutional issues has been put forward as the main culprit for this situation. However, the historical adoption by Swiss citizens in February 2014 of the SVPs popular initiative against massive immigration, a direct challenge to the existing agreement on the free movement of people with the EU, has opened a new era of uncertainty. Although the direct influence arising from formal negotiations and related agreements with the EU is relatively well documented, this is less the case for indirect Europeanization. To be sure, we know that EU influence also occurs even in the absence of international negotiations, but we do not know exactly to which extent Switzerland has been affected. That is, we do not know which policy sectors have been most influenced by indirect Europeanization, and how much the country has unilaterally adapted. There are, however, good reasons to believe that the extent of autonomous adaptation is considerable. Since 1988 the Federal Council has introduced a eurocompatibility examination in the message accompanying bills submitted to the Parliament. From then on, Federal Council messages include a section that evaluates the compatibility of the new piece of legislation with European rules. In December 2002, the European clause was further institutionalized, i.e. it was incorporated in the Federal law regulating the relationship between the Executive and the Legislative.7 In that sense, all decisionmaking processes include a European perspective, regardless of whether the outcome is eurocompatible or not. In practice, the eurocompatibility of Swiss legislation is the rule and the adoption of a legislative act which is not in conformity with European Community Law is the exception for which good reasons must be given Epiney 2009 181. Given the importance granted to the Eurocompatibility of Swiss legislation, the absence of knowledge regarding the extent of indirect Europeanization is especially striking. In fact, it is not unlikely that indirect Europeanization has stronger effects than direct Europeanization. Finally, while this Debate is dedicated to Europeanization policy processes and outputs, we have to keep in mind that the EU is but one partner among others even if it is arguably the most crucial partner for a country located in the middle of Europe such as Switzerland. The point we wish to make here is that Europeanization should be put in perspective with the impact of other international arenas. The internationalization of Swiss policies does not stop at the EUs borders. It also comprehends bilateral agreements with other countries and multilateral policies coordinated by the United Nations, the World Trade Organization or the OECD. The recent international disputes regarding tax evasion and its impact on Swiss banking secrecy come evidently to mind, but international commitments naturally affect a wide array of policy fields, from environmental and health regulations to judicial procedures. In this regard, it is useful to assess Europeanization effects while keeping an eye on the more general internationalization of Swiss policies. While the first three questions deliberately focus on the policy effects of Europeanization, the last question widens the analytical perspective. We have asked the contributors to this Debate to address additional EUinduced effects What are the main effects of Europeanization with respect to politics and polity? Starting with politicsrelated effects, what does the Swiss case tell us with respect to the ongoing, lively debate on the differential empowerment associated with Europeanization Börzel and Risse 2003 i.e. regarding the changes in the balance of power between parliament and government, between executive actors and nonstate actors, and among political parties or interest groups? Similarly, do empirical records help us to take sides on the issue of whether Europeanization increases or reduces domestic conflict? Finally, what are the polity effects, if any, brought about by Europeanization and what about the mediating role of domestic institutions Haverland 2000? Although the polity dimension is the least addressed by Europeanization studies Europeanwide Exadaktylos and Radaelli 2012a, this is presumably different in Switzerland, as shown by some of the contributors to this Debate. The first contribution by Sabine Jenni relies on the eurocompatibility assessment produced by the Government when submitting a bill to Parliament 19902000. Her content analysis focuses on the impact of direct and indirect Europeanization processes and the scope of adaptation to EU law. Her contribution shows an increasing impact of direct Europeanization across time. Furthermore, indirect Europeanization takes place in policy sectors such as social insurance including employmentrelated insurance, transportation, taxation and health, and often serves as preparation for future sectoral agreements. Roy Gava and Frédéric Varone quantitatively assess the Europeanization of domestic policy changes by looking at legal reforms enacted between 1999 and 2012. They capture the EUs footprint in primary i.e. laws, decrees and secondary i.e. ordinances legislation through a computer keyword search. Results indicate that the share of Europeanized legal reforms is systematically higher for secondary legislation enacted by the Executive than for primary legislation enacted by Parliament. Furthermore, manifest references to the EU in ordinances are mainly related to indirect Europeanization. In sum, a nonnegligible proportion of the Europeanization of Swiss policies seems to take place in the executive arena and cannot be linked to bilateral agreements. Wolf Linders article allows situating this Debate on Europeanization within the broader and earlier internationalization phenomenon. He relies on the Official Collection of Federal Legislation to analyze the evolution of the stock of domestic versus international law 19482007, as well as the evolution of lawmaking activities 19822007. Moreover, he focuses on the politics dimension, by looking at the related effects on the balance of power between parliament and government. Three trends emerge in the long run a continuous internationalization of the stock of federal law, with the proportion of international law reaching 53 in 2007 a growing role of the Government in laws that originate from international negotiations including agreements with the EU and, by contrast, a stronger impact of the Parliament on domestic legislation. The next contribution is complementary to the previous quantitative assessments of legislative outputs it assesses the level of Europeanization of parliamentary interventions initiatives, motions, questions, etc. and media coverage i.e. NZZ articles of policymaking processes and politics for the period 19962003. Pascal Sciarini, Anke Tresch and Manuel Fischer find that Europeanization is higher for media articles 11.6 than for parliamentary interventions 4.6. Furthermore, direct Europeanization is predominant in both arenas. Finally, the parliamentary and media attention is concentrated on four highly Europeanized policy issues, namely Foreign Policy, Immigration, Transportation and Foreign Trade. Note that Gava and Varone have also identified these policy sectors as domains with a high EU footprint. Sciarini and his colleagues conclude that the low level of MPs activities in Europeanized policy issues tend to confirm the deparliamentarisation hypothesis in relation to internationalized policymaking processes. This assessment is also supported by the study of Manuel Fischer and Pascal Sciarini on the legislative acts adopted by Parliament between 1995 and 2006. While the level of Europeanization of these acts is relatively low 9, expert surveys suggest that the directly and indirectly Europeanized acts are considered as being more important than purely domestic ones. Furthermore, direct Europeanization tends to also weaken the importance of the formal consultation during the preparliamentary and the subsequent parliamentary phases. The case studies carried out in different policy domains consistently demonstrate that direct Europeanization reinforces the Executive and some interest groups e.g. exportoriented business at the expense of national MPs, political parties and other non stateactors. The involvement of organized interest in Europeanized policymaking processes is also the key topic of the contribution by Alexandre Afonso, MarieChristine Fontana and Yannis Papadopoulos. The authors compare the level of social concertation in more or less Europeanized policymaking processes in Switzerland, Austria, Belgium and Ireland. Their major conclusion is that Europeanization per se is not a sufficient condition for a less inclusive pattern of policymaking. Domestic mediating factors play an important role. In this regard, the authors underline the role of partisan coalition dynamics, politicization and media attention. The Debate concludes with critical assessments of this state of the art by three internationally renowned Europeanization researchers Markus Haverland, Frank Schimmelfennig and Dirk Lehmkuhl. Their contributions highlight strong and weak points of the current Swiss scholarship and revisit crucial comparativeness issues in different ways. Markus Haverland argues that the extent to which the EU has infiltrated the Swiss political system puts into question its appropriateness as a control case for Europeanization research. However, he stresses that the peculiarity of its direct democracy institutions continues to make Switzerland particularly appealing for comparisons with EU member states. Frank Schimmelfennig adopts a differentiated integration approach to pinpoint open challenges to the current Swiss research on Europeanization. He argues that the relationship between Switzerland and the EU can be conceived in terms of a broader system of graded membership, sensitive to the differential validity of EU rules across countries and policy sectors. In particular, he shows how such a perspective invites to reconsider the way in which Swiss scholars have predominantly grasped the extent to which and how Swiss legislation is affected by EU policies. Last but not least, Dirk Lehmkuhl critically assesses some of the main takeaway messages of the contributions to this Debate. He calls for a closer dialogue to improve the comparability between Swiss studies, a point also put forward by Schimmelfennig, and encourages scholars to adapt their research strategies to tackle the many pressing, but still open, why questions. The relationship between Switzerland and the process of European integration has been depicted as close, contradictory and generally misunderstood Church, 2007. The present Debate will hopefully contribute to the collective understanding of this special relationship through a comprehensive overview of the Europeanization of Swiss policymaking. Roy Gava is a researcher at the Department of Political Science and International Relations, University of Geneva, Switzerland. He recently finished his PhD dissertation on the regulation of the Swiss banking sector. His research interests include comparative policy analysis, internationalization and financial regulation. Address for correspondence Department of Political Science and International Relations, University of Geneva, Uni Mail, Bd du Pont dArve 40, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Phone 41 22 379 83 78 Email email protected Pascal Sciarini is Professor of Swiss and Comparative politics at the University of Geneva, Switzerland. His main research topics are decisionmaking processes, direct democracy, Europeanization and political behavior. He is one of the coeditors of the Handbook of Swiss politics, NZZ Libro new FrenchGerman edition forthcoming in 2014. Address for correspondence Department of Political Science and International Relations, University of Geneva, Uni Mail, Bd du Pont dArve 40, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Phone 41 22 379 83 86 Email email protected Frédéric Varone is professor of political science at the University of Geneva, Switzerland. His current research focuses on comparative policy analysis, program evaluation, public sector reforms and interest groups. Address for correspondence Department of Political Science and International Relations, University of Geneva, Uni Mail, Bd du Pont dArve 40, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Phone 41 22 379 83 82 Email email protected