Purpose The purpose of this paper is to reexamine the extant research on lastmile logistics LML models and consider LMLs diverse roots in city logistics, home delivery and businesstoconsumer distribution, and more recent developments within the ecommerce digital supply chain context. The review offers a structured approach to what is currently a disparate and fractured field in logistics. Designmethodologyapproach The systematic literature review examines the interface between ecommerce and LML. Following a protocoldriven methodology, combined with a snowballing technique, a total of 47 articles form the basis of the review. Findings The literature analysis conceptualises the relationship between a broad set of contingency variables and operational characteristics of LML configuration pushcentric, pullcentric, and hybrid system via a set of structural variables, which are captured in the form of a design framework. The authors propose four future research areas reflecting likely digital supply chain evolutions. Research limitationsimplications To circumvent subjective selection of articles for inclusion, all papers were assessed independently by two researchers and counterchecked with two independent logistics experts. Resulting classifications inform the development of future LML models. Practical implications The design framework of this study provides practitioners insights on key contingency and structural variables and their interrelationships, as well as viable configuration options within given boundary conditions. The reformulated knowledge allows these prescriptive models to inform practitioners in their design of lastmile distribution. Social implications Improved LML performance would have positive societal impacts in terms of service and resource efficiency. Originalityvalue This paper provides the first comprehensive review on LML models in the modern ecommerce context. It synthesises knowledge of LML models and provides insights on current trends and future research directions.