21. Microb Biotechnol. 2024 Oct1710e70020. doi 10.111117517915.70020. Tracking epidemic viruses in wastewaters. GirónGuzmán I1, Sánchez G1, PérezCataluña A1. Author information 1Environmental Virology and Food Sefety Lab VISAFELab, Institute of Agrochemistry and Food Technology, IATACSIC, Paterna, Valencia, Spain. Classical epidemiology relies on incidence, mortality rates, and clinical data from individual testing, which can be challenging for many countries. Therefore, innovative, flexible, costeffective, and scalable surveillance techniques are needed. Wastewaterbased epidemiology WBE has emerged as a highly powerful tool in this regard. WBE analyses substances excreted in human fluids and faeces that enter the sewer system. This approach provides insights into community health status and lifestyle habits. WBE serves as an early warning system for viral surveillance, detecting the emergence of new pathogens, changes in incidence rates, identifying future trends, studying outbreaks, and informing the performance of action plans. While WBE has long been used to study different viruses such as poliovirus and norovirus, its implementation has surged due to the pandemic caused by the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2. This has led to the establishment of wastewater surveillance programmes at international, national, and community levels, many of which remain operational. Furthermore, WBE is increasingly applied to study other pathogens, including antibiotic resistance bacteria, parasites, fungi, and emerging viruses, with new methodologies being developed. Consequently, the primary focus now is on creating international frameworks to enhance states preparedness against future health risks. However, there remains considerable work to be done, particularly in integrating the principles of One Health into epidemiological surveillance to acknowledge the interconnectedness of humans, animals, and the environment in pathogen transmission. Thus, a broader approach to analysing the three pillars of One Health must be developed, transitioning from WBE to wastewater and environmental surveillance, and establishing this approach as a routine practice in public health. 2024 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by John Wiley Sons Ltd. DOI 10.111117517915.70020 PMID 39382399 Indexed for MEDLINE