The next contribution is complementary to the previous quantitative assessments of legislative outputs it assesses the level of Europeanization of parliamentary interventions initiatives, motions, questions, etc. and media coverage i.e. NZZ articles of policymaking processes and politics for the period 19962003. Pascal Sciarini, Anke Tresch and Manuel Fischer find that Europeanization is higher for media articles 11.6 than for parliamentary interventions 4.6. Furthermore, direct Europeanization is predominant in both arenas. Finally, the parliamentary and media attention is concentrated on four highly Europeanized policy issues, namely Foreign Policy, Immigration, Transportation and Foreign Trade. Note that Gava and Varone have also identified these policy sectors as domains with a high EU footprint. Sciarini and his colleagues conclude that the low level of MPs activities in Europeanized policy issues tend to confirm the deparliamentarisation hypothesis in relation to internationalized policymaking processes. This assessment is also supported by the study of Manuel Fischer and Pascal Sciarini on the legislative acts adopted by Parliament between 1995 and 2006. While the level of Europeanization of these acts is relatively low 9, expert surveys suggest that the directly and indirectly Europeanized acts are considered as being more important than purely domestic ones. Furthermore, direct Europeanization tends to also weaken the importance of the formal consultation during the preparliamentary and the subsequent parliamentary phases. The case studies carried out in different policy domains consistently demonstrate that direct Europeanization reinforces the Executive and some interest groups e.g. exportoriented business at the expense of national MPs, political parties and other non stateactors. The involvement of organized interest in Europeanized policymaking processes is also the key topic of the contribution by Alexandre Afonso, MarieChristine Fontana and Yannis Papadopoulos. The authors compare the level of social concertation in more or less Europeanized policymaking processes in Switzerland, Austria, Belgium and Ireland. Their major conclusion is that Europeanization per se is not a sufficient condition for a less inclusive pattern of policymaking. Domestic mediating factors play an important role. In this regard, the authors underline the role of partisan coalition dynamics, politicization and media attention. The Debate concludes with critical assessments of this state of the art by three internationally renowned Europeanization researchers Markus Haverland, Frank Schimmelfennig and Dirk Lehmkuhl. Their contributions highlight strong and weak points of the current Swiss scholarship and revisit crucial comparativeness issues in different ways. Markus Haverland argues that the extent to which the EU has infiltrated the Swiss political system puts into question its appropriateness as a control case for Europeanization research. However, he stresses that the peculiarity of its direct democracy institutions continues to make Switzerland particularly appealing for comparisons with EU member states. Frank Schimmelfennig adopts a differentiated integration approach to pinpoint open challenges to the current Swiss research on Europeanization. He argues that the relationship between Switzerland and the EU can be conceived in terms of a broader system of graded membership, sensitive to the differential validity of EU rules across countries and policy sectors. In particular, he shows how such a perspective invites to reconsider the way in which Swiss scholars have predominantly grasped the extent to which and how Swiss legislation is affected by EU policies. Last but not least, Dirk Lehmkuhl critically assesses some of the main takeaway messages of the contributions to this Debate. He calls for a closer dialogue to improve the comparability between Swiss studies, a point also put forward by Schimmelfennig, and encourages scholars to adapt their research strategies to tackle the many pressing, but still open, why questions. The relationship between Switzerland and the process of European integration has been depicted as close, contradictory and generally misunderstood Church, 2007. The present Debate will hopefully contribute to the collective understanding of this special relationship through a comprehensive overview of the Europeanization of Swiss policymaking. Roy Gava is a researcher at the Department of Political Science and International Relations, University of Geneva, Switzerland. He recently finished his PhD dissertation on the regulation of the Swiss banking sector. His research interests include comparative policy analysis, internationalization and financial regulation. Address for correspondence Department of Political Science and International Relations, University of Geneva, Uni Mail, Bd du Pont dArve 40, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Phone 41 22 379 83 78 Email email protected Pascal Sciarini is Professor of Swiss and Comparative politics at the University of Geneva, Switzerland. His main research topics are decisionmaking processes, direct democracy, Europeanization and political behavior. He is one of the coeditors of the Handbook of Swiss politics, NZZ Libro new FrenchGerman edition forthcoming in 2014. Address for correspondence Department of Political Science and International Relations, University of Geneva, Uni Mail, Bd du Pont dArve 40, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Phone 41 22 379 83 86 Email email protected Frédéric Varone is professor of political science at the University of Geneva, Switzerland. His current research focuses on comparative policy analysis, program evaluation, public sector reforms and interest groups. Address for correspondence Department of Political Science and International Relations, University of Geneva, Uni Mail, Bd du Pont dArve 40, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Phone 41 22 379 83 82 Email email protected