Since 2018, in a new line of cases the Court of Justice of the European Union was asked to interpret the principle of judicial independence in light of the value of the rule of law. This line of cases has a constitutional relevance in the architecture of the European Union legal order. In fact, it touches upon different constitutional principles related to the EU judicial system such as the principle of effective judicial protection of individuals rights, the principle of judicial independence, and the principle of national procedural autonomy. Our analysis focuses on the 2018 Associação Sindical dos Juízes Portugueses ASJP case that inaugurated the aforesaid line of cases. In this judgment, the Court provided its first interpretation of art. 191, second subparagraph, TEU in conjunction with the principle of judicial independence. Legal scholars have been widely commenting and referring to the ASJP case as groundbreaking, surprising, an act of judicial courage, a potential constitutional moment. Nevertheless, we intend to cast doubts on the innovative contribution character of the ASJP judgment to the interpretation of art. 191, second subparagraph TEU and of the principle of judicial independence taking into consideration the previous caselaw of the CJEU. Hence, this paper will answer the following question How can the reasoning of the CJEU in the ASJP case be reconciled with its earlier case law?This paper will proceed as follows. In the first part, the legal reasoning of the Advocate General AG and of the Court in the ASJP case will be analysed, focusing on the interpretation of art. 191 TEU and of the principle of judicial independence. In the second part, a brief review of the legal doctrine commenting the case and laying emphasis on its innovative contribution will be conducted. In this regard, we point out the elements presented as novelty. Finally, in the third part, the abovementioned elements will be used as a benchmark of comparison of the reasoning of the CJEU in the ASJP case with the previous caselaw of the same Court, arguing that they do not actually constitute a novelty per se.