This is not a trivial issue. Studies with too diverging dependent variables might run the risk to talk past each other and to hinder the development of cumulative knowledge. In her review of nonSwiss, quantitative studies mapping the domestic consequences of EU policies, Töller 2012 highlights some key definitional issues for the study of policy outputs. First, how can we measure policy creation, policy changes andor policy continuity induced by Europeanization? Most empirical studies tend to equate Europeanization with policy change. But it is also worthwhile considering policy stability or continuity as one possible outcome of Europeanization. This is in particular the case when the legislator deliberately decides not to support a policy proposal that would be incompatible with EU norms or that would render the domestic rule less compatible with the EU norm. Given that they resort to comprehensive datasets and long timeperiods, quantitative approaches may privilege simplified measures of Europeanization and policy change. In contrast, comparative case studies may analyze the substantive content of policies more in depth policy objectives, instruments, implementation arrangements, etc., but face the challenges of case selection and external validity. Second, Europeanization scholars adopting quantitative approaches have resorted to legislation to assess the EUs influence on domestic policies. Assessing policy outputs by means of legislation has two major advantages it allows for a quantification of Europeanization processes and outputs, and it facilitates comparison across countries and sectors over time see Brouard et al. 2012. However, to what extent is legislation a pertinent proxy for public policy? This may make sense for regulatory policies, but much less so for policies where EU effects are hardly traceable, such as budgetary policy. Third, through which kinds of legislation does Europeanization exert its influence on domestic policies? Does Europeanization occur through primary legislation i.e. constitutional amendments, international treaties, and federal laws and decrees, enacted by Parliament and subject to referendum? Is it more of a technocratic process taking place behind the scenes in the form of secondary legislation i.e.