100. Antimicrob Resist Infect Control. 2024 Oct 8131119. doi 10.1186s13756024014746. Can probiotics trigger a paradigm shift for cleaning healthcare environments? A narrative review. Denkel LA12, Voss A3, Caselli E4, Dancer SJ5, Leistner R678, Gastmeier P67, Widmer AF910. Author information 1Institute of Hygiene and Environmental Medicine, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, HumboldtUniversität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Hindenburgdamm 27, 12203, Berlin, Germany. luisa.denkelcharite.de. 2National Reference Center for the Surveillance of Nosocomial Infections, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, HumboldtUniversität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany. luisa.denkelcharite.de. 3Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. 4Section of Microbiology, Department of Chemical, Pharmaceutical, and Agricultural Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. 5NHS Lanarkshire Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK. 6Institute of Hygiene and Environmental Medicine, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, HumboldtUniversität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Hindenburgdamm 27, 12203, Berlin, Germany. 7National Reference Center for the Surveillance of Nosocomial Infections, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, HumboldtUniversität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany. 8Department of Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, HumboldtUniversität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany. 9Faculty of Medicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. 10Swissnoso Swiss National Center for Infection Prevention, Bern, Switzerland. BACKGROUND The environment of healthcare institutions plays a major role in the transmission of multidrug resistant organisms MDRO and likely in subsequent healthcareassociated infections HAIs. Probiotic cleaning products are a novel option for environmental cleaning. They represent a sustainable and biodegradable alternative to conventional chemical disinfectants for controlling microbial bioburden, and preventing pathogen transmission in hospital environments. Highquality studies including randomized clinical trials RCT triggered a summary with expert recommendations until further studies allow a critical review and metaanalysis of the data. METHODS Infection control experts from five European countries summarized available data as of June 2023. Authors presented their published RCTs, reviewed the existing literature on probiotic cleaning, summarized the results and identified knowledge gaps and subsequent research needs. RESULTS Probiotic cleaning was similarly effective for reducing HAIrelated pathogens, enveloped viruses such as SARSCoV2 and MDRO in environmental samples compared to conventional chemical disinfectants. More importantly, probiotic cleaning was noninferior to disinfectants in terms of preventing HAI in a large RCT. In addition, probiotic cleaning has also been shown to reduce antimicrobial resistance genes ARG, costs and antimicrobial consumption in other hospital trials. They are biodegradable, do not require any protection for chemical hazards, and are compliant with occupational health. A paradigm shift, however, requires a very strong evidence to justify for such a change. In the past, this evidence was limited by the heterogeneity of study design, products, protocols, and few studies on clinical outcomes used in the trials. Furthermore, the regulatory, safety, and quality aspects of probiotic cleaning products are not, yet, completely defined and require clearing by authorities. CONCLUSION To date, probiotic cleaning is a breakthrough technology and a biological alternative for chemical disinfectant when treating hospital environment. It may also have a positive effect on MDRO transmission. However, the different compositions of probiotic products will require standardization, and more robust data should be generated to support these promising results on different compositions. This may trigger a paradigm shift in cleaning of healthcare institutions from chemical to biological control of the hospital environment. 2024. The Authors. DOI 10.1186s13756024014746 PMID 39380032 Indexed for MEDLINE