24. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 Oct 9e0156724. doi 10.1128spectrum.0156724. Online ahead of print. Exploring the causes of variability in quality of oropharyngeal swab sampling for SARSCoV2 nucleic acid testing and proposed improvement measures a multicenter, doubleblind study. Zhu J1, Xing F2, Li Y3, Wu C4, Li S5, Wang Q6, Huang J2, Zhang Y1, Zheng X7, Liu Z8, Rao J9, Hong R10, Tian S11, Xiong S12, Tan L5, Chen X1, Li Y1, He W11, Hong X1, Xia J4, Zhou Q6, Zhang Z1. Author information 1Institute of Clinical Virology, Department of Infectious Diseases, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. 2Department of Clinical Microbiology and Infection Control, The University of Hong KongShenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, China. 3Department of Infectious Diseases, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, The First Peoples Hospital of Hefei, Hefei, China. 4Department of Laboratory Medicine, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Hubei Province, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. 5Division of Liver Disease, The Second Peoples Hospital of Fuyang City, Fuyang, China. 6Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. 7Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. 8Department of Infectious Diseases, Anqing Municipal Hospital, Anqing, China. 9Department of Infectious Diseases, The Luan Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Luan Peoples Hospital, Luan, China. 10Department of Infectious Diseases, Tongling Municipal Hospital, Tongling, China. 11Division of Liver Disease, Traditional Chinese Hospital of LuAn, Anhui University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Luan, China. 12Department of Infectious Diseases, Funan County Peoples Hospital, Fuyang, China. Contributed equally Although coronavirus disease 2019 COVID19 has not been considered a public health emergency of international concern since last year, intermittent regional impacts still persist, and accurate testing remains crucial. Ribonuclease P protein subunit P30 RPP30 RNA, known for its broad and stable expression in tissue cells, was used to evaluate samples from 10 hospitals with over 3,000 negative nucleic acid tests. The results revealed that the overall pass rate for the collected samples was consistently low and exhibited significant heterogeneity. After reassessing the evaluative effectiveness of RPP30 RNA Ct values from the samples of 132 positive individuals under quarantine observation, it was used to identify factors affecting sampling quality. These factors included different stages ranging from sample collection to PCR processing, various characteristics of both samplers and individuals being sampled, as well as sampling season and location. The results indicated that postsampling handling had minimal impact, winter and fever clinic samples showed higher quality, whereas childrens samples had lower quality. The key finding was that the characteristics of samplers were closely related to sampling quality, emphasizing the role of subjectivity. Quality control warnings led to substantial improvements, confirming this finding. Consequently, although there are various factors during the testing process, the most critical aspect is to improve, supervise, and maintain standardized practices among sampling staff.IMPORTANCEThis study further confirmed the reliability of internal references IRs in assessing sample quality, and utilized a large sample IR data to comprehensively and multidimensionally identify significant interference factors in nucleic acid test results. By further reminding and intervening in the subjective practices of specimen collectors, good results could be achieved. DOI 10.1128spectrum.0156724 PMID 39382280