eCollection 2024 Sep 30. Influenza viruses and SARSCoV2 diagnosis via sensitive testing methods in clinical application. Zhang L12, Li C3, Shao S1, Zhang Z4, Chen D1. Author information 1Department of Critical Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. 2School of Ecology and Environment, Tibet University, Lhasa 850000, China. 3Department of Emergency Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400010, China. 4State Key Laboratory of New Textile Materials and Advanced Processing Technologies, School of Bioengineering and Health, Wuhan Textile University, Wuhan, 430200, China. The identification of influenza viruses and SARSCoV2 has garnered increasing attention due of their longstanding global menace to human life and health. The pointofcare test is a potential approach for identifying influenza viruses and SARSCoV2 in clinical settings, leading to timely discovery, documentation, and treatment. The primary difficulties encountered with conventional detection techniques for influenza viruses and SARSCoV2 are the limited or inadequate ability to identify the presence of the viruses, the lack of speed, precision, accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity, often resulting in a failure to promptly notify disease control authorities. Recently, pointofcare test methods, along with nucleic acid amplification, optics, electrochemistry, lateralvertical flow, and minimization, have been demonstrated the characteristics of reliability, sensitivity, specificity, stability, and portability. A pointofcare test offers promising findings in the early detection of influenza viruses and SARSCoV2 in both scientific research and practical use. In this review, we will go over the principles, advantages, limitations, and realworld applications of pointofcare diagnostics. The significance of constraints of detection, throughput, sensitivity, and specificity in the analysis of clinical samples in settings with restricted resources is underscored. This discussion concludes with their prospects and challenges.