Authors first presented how they have defined their dependent variable, and how they have measured the EUinduced effects. This is not a trivial issue. Studies with too diverging dependent variables might run the risk to talk past each other and to hinder the development of cumulative knowledge. In her review of nonSwiss, quantitative studies mapping the domestic consequences of EU policies, Töller 2012 highlights some key definitional issues for the study of policy outputs. First, how can we measure policy creation, policy changes andor policy continuity induced by Europeanization? Most empirical studies tend to equate Europeanization with policy change. But it is also worthwhile considering policy stability or continuity as one possible outcome of Europeanization. This is in particular the case when the legislator deliberately decides not to support a policy proposal that would be incompatible with EU norms or that would render the domestic rule less compatible with the EU norm. Given that they resort to comprehensive datasets and long timeperiods, quantitative approaches may privilege simplified measures of Europeanization and policy change. In contrast, comparative case studies may analyze the substantive content of policies more in depth policy objectives, instruments, implementation arrangements, etc., but face the challenges of case selection and external validity. Second, Europeanization scholars adopting quantitative approaches have resorted to legislation to assess the EUs influence on domestic policies. Assessing policy outputs by means of legislation has two major advantages it allows for a quantification of Europeanization processes and outputs, and it facilitates comparison across countries and sectors over time see Brouard et al. 2012. However, to what extent is legislation a pertinent proxy for public policy? This may make sense for regulatory policies, but much less so for policies where EU effects are hardly traceable, such as budgetary policy. Third, through which kinds of legislation does Europeanization exert its influence on domestic policies? Does Europeanization occur through primary legislation i.e. constitutional amendments, international treaties, and federal laws and decrees, enacted by Parliament and subject to referendum? Is it more of a technocratic process taking place behind the scenes in the form of secondary legislation i.e. through government ordinances, regulatory decisions made by independent agencies? This raises the more general question regarding the mechanisms of Europeanization Knill and Lehmkuhl 2002. Further, what about soft law, which may have a dramatic impact on public policies, as demonstrated by the emblematic example of the Bologna reform in higher education policy? While the three previous points may particularly concern scholars interested in policy outputs, those privileging policy processes also face significant challenges. How to measure the degree of Europeanization of domestic policymaking? How can we distinguish decisionmaking processes that are Europeanized from those that are not? Which criteria may help us to draw the line between the two types of processes? In this regard, can we expect to grasp degrees of Europeanization? The second research question addressed in this Debate concerns the variations of Europeanization across policy domains, and the changes in the scope of Europeanization across time Do we actually observe significant differences between policy domains and periods? And what are the underlying explanatory factors? For example, does the extent of Europeanization vary according to the degree of export orientation of a policy sector or according to the rhythm and agenda of negotiations with the EU? These subquestions are important for both academic and political reasons. In media and partisan circles, the Delors myth is still very vivid according to the famous claim of the former President of the EC Commission, 80 of national lawproduction related to economics in EU members states originates at the European level.3 This mythical figure continues to be echoed without strong empirical support König and Mäder 2008. A recent study compared the share of Europeanized domestic laws in eight EU countries Austria, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Spain across 19 policy areas and over the period 19862007 Brouard et al. 2012. The average impact of EU activities on domestic legislation is far lower than suggested by Delors it ranges from 14 in France to 26 in Austria. Variations between policy domains are also considerable. Policy sectors like Law, Macroeconomics, Government Operations, Agriculture, Banking Finance, and Environment are much more influenced by the EU than Defense, Housing, and Social Welfare. Finally, there is a clear trend towards a higher Europeanization of domestic laws over time. The issue of the EUs influence on the Swiss legal order and policies has special democratic relevance given the absence of Switzerlands participation in EU decisionmaking processes. The level of Europeanization of Swiss policies has naturally attracted the attention of academics and policymakers alike. For instance, MPs have more than once requested the Federal Council to provide figures on the proportion of Swiss legislation influenced by the EU.4 The Federal Council has acknowledged the lack of information and the inherent difficulties of establishing such a systematic inventory.5 Despite the Governments reticence, in September 2013 the National Council finally adopted a postulate formally inviting the Federal Council to consider the issue.