The issue was which borders to close for what, and by whom? The European Economic Area is one space with open borders and free movement for people, goods, services, and capital. These free movements are limited across the EU for people nonSchengen countries or when there is a national emergency. Member states are still responsible for external EU borders, which are a complex set of international airports and harbors and physical outer country borders. The European Border and Coast Guard Agency Frontex assists EU member states and Schengenassociated countries e.g., Switzerland in managing these external borders and harmonizing EU border control. Overall, in some cases, the closing border solution was part of symbolic policies by national politicians under pressure to take visible measures for their domestic audiences. In other words, these policies provide another prime example of coronationalism. DecisionMaking What Sustainable Logics to Follow? Within this pandemic crisis, two logics have been followed, and some countries probably changed logics. As a result of scientific debates about how to effectively stop the virus, the herd logic of building collective immunity through spreading the virus in the herd was opposed to the containment logic, which required drastic and immediate quarantine measures to let the virus expire. Italy, France, Germany, and Belgium but also other countries, such as Spain, Switzerland, and Austria followed the containment logic, whereas the United Kingdom and the Netherlands initially followed the herd logic. Sweden took a different approach by, on the one hand, pursuing the containment logic stopping the virus from spreading, in particular by the government issuing official recommendations of conduct, notably to highrisk groups, but, on the other hand, abstaining from restrictive measures, such as lockdowns, and contenting itself with voluntary citizen compliance regarding social distancing and other hygiene precautions. What explains these differences? In the four Napoleonic and classical Continental European countries examined here, the clear separation of state and society and the perceived supremacy of the state visàvis society, which are essential elements of the administrative culture of each country Kuhlmann and Wollmann 2019, 16 et seq., are central to the explanation of the immediate, restrictive, and fairly undisputed approaches to containment. Here, the state quickly took the lead and made tough decisions that restricted citizens freedoms in order to stop the spread of the virus. In the cases of Italy and France, where the virus spread more rapidly, a determined shift toward containment logic can also be explained by the sheer pressure to act as the number of deaths increased. In Belgium and Germany, on the other hand, dramatic news and images from Italy and, to some extent, France supported the strong reactions, first and foremost, of governments at the central level. They were supported by the regional or Länder governments in a coordinated and united way. The more liberal coping with the pandemic that was adopted, at least initially, in the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and Sweden, can presumably be related inter alia to their administrative cultures marked by a less interventionist and hierarchical logic of governmental activities. However, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, after a while, shifted to the containment logic, which can be interpreted as a convergence of pandemic management paradigms. A range of reasons collateral damage getting too high, expert discussions being controversial may explain this shift, although all governments based their decisions on what scientists claimed what was best to do Van Dooren and Noordegraaf 2020. The common containment logic has resulted in a similar mix of shutdowns, lockdowns, contact bans, and event cancellations. Security forces have been responsible for monitoring these measures and punishing noncompliance. The substantial equivalence of the choices made appears to be of particular interest in consideration of the different general modes of crisis management that distinguished the four countries table 2. Whereas the restrictive containment approach represents a convergent trend of coping with the crisis in European countries with Sweden as a remarkable exception, there are major differences in the institutional drivers. A clear distinction can be made between a more regional or decentralized and a more national or centralized logic.