Health experts are at the crossroads of politicians, administrators, and the population at large. Legal burdens, limitations, or restrictions on electronic transfers of data, teleworking, fasttrack processing seem to accelerate and create precedents for future ways of delivering services, implement policies, and taking decisions. However, all European countries wrestle with remaining issues, which cannot be entirely solved by experts or technical committees for coordination, at the national or at EU level, about tensions between policies or allocation of resources and capacity. There are tensions about how to allocate capacity masks, ventilators, personal protective equipment between regions, between hospitals and centers of care homes for senior citizens, handicapped, psychiatric patients, prisons, and between delivery chain or security forces. There are tensions between values and priorities monitoring mobility through mobile technology versus privacy keeping public transport mobility versus restricting mobility. Finally, extraordinary measures such as plenary powers or national emergency powers allow for tackling these very complex, even wicked problems. Communicating Whom to Convince and How? Framing and effective communication require a simple and straightforward logic. To move from monitoring and risk management to grounded decisions that are owned by those who need to implement these measures requires a framing in an official and a general communication strategy. This ownership of the message around a shared objective, contain and stop the spread of the virus, is needed to unite and to mobilize goodwill and resources, supported by traditional old media as well as new social media and to collaborate politically all or most political parties, but also executive with legislative and judicial powers across the public sectorthat is, vertically all levels of governmentand across societythat is horizontally private sector, nongovernmental organizations, and citizens. In all cases, the key official communication was centralized and monopolized by the highest political leadership communicating directly with the population. All speeches by heads of state or government include three components first, enhancing awareness by emphasizing the gravity of the pandemic, the difference from past diseases, and the need for urgent and drastic measures second, providing reassurance of being handson and having the capacity to solve but requesting discipline and support from everybody and third, gratefulness to frontline worke