States are free, yet everywhere live under international courts. Sovereign states are no longer in a state of nature without arbitrators among them on matters ranging from territorial disputes and human rights to international crimes, crossborder trade, and investment. The core task of these international courts and tribunals ICs is to adjudicate disputes through interpretation and application of international law by legal methods. Their judicial adjudication may also contribute indirectly to a range of tasksto prevent war, protect human rights and foreign direct investments, harmonize international law, but also to usurp lawmaking power or perpetuate global injustice and domination. As ICs proliferate and gain power across ever more domains, they become targets of a bewildering range of resistance.2 Criticisms often invoke legitimacy. Some question ICs originsquerying, for instance, why developing states are forced to accept investment tribunals that privilege foreign investors.3 Their processes are criticizedfor example, when UK Brexiteers challenge the legality of treaty interpretations by the Court of Justice of the European Union CJEU.4 The interpretations by the Appellate Body of the World Trade Organization WTO AB face criticism both for being too expansive5 and for not protecting the environment even more.6 ICs legitimacy may also suffer from their outputs, be it the backlog of cases of the European Court of Human Rights ECtHR7 or the too few cases decided on their merits by the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea ITLOS.8 Such concerns and taxonomies lack an overarching account. Some may therefore dismiss legitimacy criticisms as emotivist, mislabelled, confused, or mere manipulation.9 Others may regard such challenges as category mistakes, since legitimacy theories usually address inescapable state power over individuals. In contrast, IC jurisdiction requires state consent and seldom entails sanctions in a strict sense.10 A more charitable reconstruction of these criticisms recasts them as questioning the legitimate authority of ICs. Why and when are ICs justified in claiming that others should defer to their judgments and interpretations? ICs have several deference constituencies beyond states they claim deference from investors, individuals, international organizations, and other ICs.11 But the ICs legitimate authority over states is central, since international law is largely based on state consentso ICs are, in some sense, optional for them. Furthermore, ICs lack independent enforcement powers and must rely on states compliance. How states regard an ICs authority is therefore crucial to induce states to consent to it, convince parties to defer to interpretations and judgments, and to keep them from exiting its jurisdictionor even closing the IC down.12 What reasons might a state have to defer to an ICs judgment or interpretation, even when the state regards it as mistaken, and even when it conflicts with the interests and objectives of government? This overview draws on Razs account of legitimate authority that addresses similar puzzles how to justify obedience to commands somewhat independent of their content, and that preempt or exclude some of the subjects other reasons for action.13 This account may not be what critics have in mind, nor does the argument schema provide substantive arguments or seek to show that all such criticisms are correct.14 The aims are, rather, to make many such criticisms comprehensible as legitimacy concerns, to provide a rationale for popular taxonomies of legitimacy criticisms, and to indicate which premises and arguments are required for such criticisms to be correct. Section I sketches the multiple tasks of ICs, in complex interdependence with other actors. Section II addresses some aspects of the relation between the normative legitimacy of ICs and descriptive legitimacy, and actors beliefs therein. Section III shows how a wide range of legitimacy challenges concern ways ICs fail to carry out their tasks. On this account, an IC enjoys legitimate authority over a state when it enables the state to better act as it has appropriate reasons tobe it to increase international trade and direct foreign investment, or to promote human rights at home and abroad. The various tasks of ICs may enable the state in several different ways.15 The IC may be wiser than the state have a steadier will less subject to bias or weakness it may help the state avoid selfdefeating strategies reduce its decisionmaking costs or it may be better positioned, for example to overcome coordination problems.16 On this account, an IC may be a legitimate authority for some, but not all, constituencies, even if its treaty fails to secure full justice, and even if it issues some bad judgments, as long as it enables that subject to act somewhat better.17 States have tasked ICs to adjudicate disputes by issuing impartial judgments based on international law by legal methods.18 In doing this core microlevel task, ICs also perform other mesolevel tasks.19 First, in order to adjudicate, ICs must often specify and interpret treaties to fit the particular circumstances.20 ICs in effect develop and often set precedents with implications beyond the particular dispute. Public justifications and dissents further stabilize and specify expectations.21 This task violates standard views about the courts resolving disputes based on preexisting rules,22 and trespasses on the traditional separation of powers. This task requires constituencies to treat the ICs development of international law as authoritative reasons for action.