2Leeds Institute for Data Analytics, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. 3NIHR Exeter Biomedical Research Centre, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. 4Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. 5Department of Public Health and Sport Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. 6Northern Care Alliance, Salford, UK. 7Department of Sport, Health and Social Work, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK. 8Cardiff and Vale University Health Board, Cardiff, UK. 9University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK. 10Faculty of Medicine, Department of Surgery Cancer, Imperial College, London, UK. 11School of Health Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK. 12Leeds Institute of Health Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. 13In the Wild Research Limited, Dublin, Ireland. 14Patient Advisory Group PAG Representative, UK. 15Department of Health and Community Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. 16COVID Recovery Service, NHS Highlands, Raigmore Hospital, Inverness, UK. 17MRCUniversity of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, UK. 18Academic Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. 19Insight SFI Research Centre for Data Analytics, Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland. 20School of Psychology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. BACKGROUND Symptom fluctuations within and between individuals with long COVID are widely reported, but the extent to which severity varies following different types of activity and levels of exertion, and the timing of symptoms and recovery, have not previously been quantified. We aimed to characterise timing, severity, and nature of symptom fluctuations in response to effortful physical, social and cognitive activities, using Ecological Momentary Assessments. METHODS We recorded activity, effort, and severity of 8 core symptoms every 3 h for up to 24 days, in cohorts from both clinic and community settings. Symptom severities were jointly modelled using autoregressive and moving average processes. FINDINGS Consent was received from 376 participants providing 1 weeks measurements 273 clinicbased, 103 communitybased. Severity of all symptoms was elevated 30 min after all categories of activity. Increased effort was associated with increased symptom severity. Fatigue severity scores increased by 1.810 95 CI 1.61.9 following the highest physical exertions and by 1.5 1.41.7 following cognitive efforts. There was evidence of only mild delayed fatigue 3 h 0.3, 0.20.5 or one day later 0.2, 0.0 0.5. Fatigue severity increased as the day progressed 1.4, 1.01.7, and cognitive dysfunction was 0.2 lower at weekends 0.10.3. INTERPRETATION Cognitive, social, selfcare and physical activities all triggered increased severity across every symptom, consistent with associated common pathways as potential therapeutic targets. Clear patterns of symptom fluctuations emerged that support more targeted selfmanagement. FUNDING National Institute for Health and Care Research.