15771. Executing domestic courts are only allowed to check the issuing courts independence on an exceptional, casebycase basis. The applicable judicial test has first been laid down in Aranyosi and Căldăraru para. 81, which concerned prison conditions. The same test has been relied on by the CJEU in the LM para. 70 case in relation to doubts concerning the independence of the requesting court, as if it was selfevident that prisons and courts would raise the same problématique. The CJEU could have developed a different test for systemic Rule of Law deficiencies, but instead it followed the same logic applied to potential human rights deficiencies in Aranyosi, given that the issue of judicial independence also boils down to a human rights problem of the requested person, namely their right to a fair trial. As the first step of the Aranyosi test the executing court must assess whether the operation of the justice system in the issuing state suffers from general deficiencies in terms of judicial independence. If it does not, the individual must be surrendered. 27 If it does, the second, individual prong of the test kicks in, where the judge must determine, specifically and precisely, whether there are substantial grounds to believe that the requested person will be exposed to a real risk of a violation of their fair trial rights, also with regard to a potential lack of independence of the courts, 28 if surrendered Bárd and van Ballegooij, 2018 van Ballegooij and Bárd, 2016. To agree with AG Sharpston, this prong of the test is unduly stringent, 29 if not unworkable. What is more, the CJEU obliges requested and requesting courts to engage in a discussion about compliance with established by law and judicial independence requirements, which essentially means that, absurdly, the fake courts and impostors posing as judges, who issued the EAWs, are invited to assess their own compliance themselves. But the problem is even broader than that properly appointed and independent individual judges cannot save a flawed system Bárd and Morijn, 2020. The CJEU nevertheless insisted on the LM test in L and P, no matter how severe the systemic problem is, pretending that judges can still retain their independence in the middle of state and judicial capture. 30 The Court in effect sacrificed the fundamental right to an independent tribunal established by law to the altar of mutual trust An interpretation to the contrary would amount to extending the limitations that may be placed on the principles of mutual trust and mutual recognition beyond exceptional circumstances, 31 insisting on this further, also in WO and JL, which postdates the ruling of the compromised Polish Constitutional Court in K321 2021 that Article 191 TEU as such is not in line with Polish Constitution. This is not the first instance when CJEU sacrifices substantive principles in the name of procedural ones, but a telling one nevertheless Kochenov, 2015. Similarly to a body, which is not established by law, but is still welcome to enter some kind of dialogue with CJEU post Getin Noble Bank, a judge in a flawed system suffering from serious rule of law deficiencies unquestionably qualifies as issuing judicial authority for a EAW, thanks to the CJEUs insistence on LM at the expense of human rights and the rule of law. The test is designed to justify even the most gruesome nationallevel rule of law deficiencies no matter what. However independent the individual judge, surrendering anyone to Poland today is particularly questionable from the point of view of fundamental rights, since it is well established by the CJEU and ECtHR that all the highest courts in the Country are irregularly composed, including the criminal chamber of the Polish Supreme Court. Appeals are thus unquestionably and surely bound to result in Article 6 ECHR rights violations of anyone surrendered, as CJEU knows very well. The CJEU acquired a rare chance to test the judicial independence and irremovability standards as applied to its own members as a result of Brexit. The departure of the UK on 1 February 2020 resulted in the shrinking of the membership of the Court, as all the CJEU judges appointed by the UK stopped being members of the Court on the day of Brexit. The same did not apply to AG Sharpston since the Treaties did not require AGs to resign upon the departure of the Member State of their nationality from the Union, she continued serving on the Court past the Brexit date. This situation displeased some Member States, 32 and a political decision was taken to interpret AG Sharpstons office as affected by Brexit Council of the European Union, 2020 in direct violation of the express wording of the Treaties, which did not make such a connection. The Herren der Verträge thus decided to amend the Treaties by a political agreement inter se and appoint a Greek gentleman as an AG although no vacancy existed and the cardinal principle of irremovability in CJEU and ECtHR caselaw should have been applied to AG Sharpston. Marking a radical difference with the situation in Poland, the President of the Court seemingly assisted the Member States in breaking the law and removing a sitting member whose mandate has not expired, in breach of the Treaties and underlying principles of judicial independence see Kochenov and Butler, 2022. AG Sharpston brought a number of actions in front of the General Court and the action of the Member States initiating the unlawful appointment was briefly suspended Judge Collins hearing the case reasoned that the negative consequences of replacing a lawfully appointed office holder by someone who may ultimately be deemed to have been appointed unlawfully, are selfevident.