Aguirre M. et al.Comprehensive assessment of cryogenic storage risk and quality management concerns best practice guidelines for ART labs.J Assist Reprod Genetics. 2019 36 514Crossref PubMed Scopus 16 Google Scholar. General items to be included in the development of policies to manage cryostorage risk include the followingIdentifying the applicable cryostorage law, regulation, or judicial outcome and appropriate professional guidelines relevant to the clinics geographic area, and incorporating any requirements into practice.Surveying the location of cryopreservation storage units to evaluate for accessibility, safety, and security for maintaining tank integrity and temperature uniformity, which is necessary to protect cryopreserved material and staff.Ensuring that liquid or vapor nitrogen tanks are in good condition, operational, and stored properly in a wellventilated area. Oxygen monitors are strongly recommended.Developing routine cryopreservation equipment and tank management processes to include regular equipment and tank inspection, as well as repair and replacement based on manufacturers guidelines and standard industry usage.Installing locking and electronic monitoring systems on all cryopreservation storage tanks. This should include appropriate monitoring probe placement within the tanks, multiple alarm notification pathways, and backup energy supplies i.e., generators or batteries.Maintaining executed cryopreservation agreements with depositors that address cryopreservation processes, location and duration of storage, storage fees, depositors obligation to maintain contact, offsite transfer permission if applicable, and clear final disposition instructions.Developing protocols to reduce specimen loss during inventory e.g., consider automated identification and contamination during process and storage e.g., consider sterilization of liquid nitrogen and universal precautions.Addressing emergency and disaster responses, including staff safety, availability of first aid, cryostorage tank security, backup facilities, processes for closure andor movement of cryopreserved gametes and embryos to alternative locations as needed.Initial and periodic mandatory training of all embryology and andrology personnel on cryopreservation and cryostorage processes, policies, and procedures. As the world economy becomes more global, so does reproductive care. Domestic and international movement of gametes and embryos are seen every day as patients relocate or move their care to different clinics both within and outside their home countries. Prompted by reasons from access to better care and more services to removing legal barriers and improving availability of donors or surrogates to lowering costs, a recent review of crossborder reproductive care showed an upward trend of people traveling outside their home countries for ART treatments 33Salama M. Isachenko V. Isachenko E. Rahimi G. Mallmann P.