Cryopreservation of reproductive material has dramatically improved clinical outcomes for patients all over the world. At the same time the practice has produced significant legal, ethical, and practical challenges to physicians and practices who use this technique. Failing to meet the expectations of patients, for example by losing material because of a freezer failure, has significant implications for the reproductive facility. Similarly, improperly transporting or receiving gametes or embryos can result in substantial risk to a practice. Perhaps the most widely publicized conundrum is how best to manage embryos that are abandoned. This paper will describe the legal principles and best practices that should be incorporated into the management of a fertility cryopreservation program. Cryopreservation of reproductive material has dramatically improved clinical outcomes for patients all over the world. At the same time the practice has produced significant legal, ethical, and practical challenges to physicians and practices who use this technique. Failing to meet the expectations of patients, for example by losing material because of a freezer failure, has significant implications for the reproductive facility. Similarly, improperly transporting or receiving gametes or embryos can result in substantial risk to a practice. Perhaps the most widely publicized conundrum is how best to manage embryos that are abandoned. This paper will describe the legal principles and best practices that should be incorporated into the management of a fertility cryopreservation program. Discuss You can discuss this article with its authors and other readers at httpswww.fertstertdialog.composts31860 Discuss You can discuss this article with its authors and other readers at httpswww.fertstertdialog.composts31860 The field of freezing in human reproduction has come a long way since the Italian scientist Spallanzani first used snow to cool human sperm in 1776 1Ombelet W. Van Robays J. Artificial insemination history hurdles and milestones.Facts Views Vis Obgyn. 2015 7 137143PubMed Google Scholar. Since that time, cryopreservation advances have improved the use of artificial insemination and, in the 1980s, affected human pregnancy potential, and the field of reproductive medicine, dramatically with the introduction of human embryo cryopreservation. The first pregnancy was established in 1983 2Trounson A. Mohr L. Human pregnancy following cryopreservation, thawing and transfer of an eightcell embryo.Nature. 1983 305 707709Crossref PubMed Scopus 795 Google Scholar, followed by the first live birth from a thawed frozen embryo in 1984 3Zeilmaker G.H. Alberda A.T. van Gent I. Rijkmans C.M. Drogendijk A.C. Two pregnancies following transfer of intact frozenthawed embryos.Fertil Steril. 1984 42 293296Abstract Full Text PDF PubMed Scopus 264 Google Scholar. Fast forward another decade, and reproductive medicine achieved and accepted oocyte freezing as another tool to enhance fertility treatment. Today, improved processes of cryopreservation or freezing as it is commonly known of human sperm, oocytes, and embryos, using vitrification to reduce freezing time and improve survival rates 4Konc J. Kanyó K.