Arnone A. et al.Oocyte vitrificationstoragehandlingtransportationwarming, effect on survival and clinical results in donation programmes.Curr Trends Clin Embryol. 2017 4 3440Crossref Google Scholar. Moving embryos can be risky business for all parties, as was seen in a 2017 federal lawsuit when the embryos arrived at their destination in a nonviable state. The devastated intended parents sued for destruction of embryos resulting from improper shipping practices, including claims against the sending longterm storage facility party who packed the shipper, the shipping company employer of the worker who opened the container because he saw gas escaping, and the receiving fertility clinic party who unpacked the shipping container 40Lucio v. UPS Co. Case No. 916CV81703RLR S.D. Fla. Jan. 31, 2017.Google Scholar. But documented incidents are only one guiding force in how to move embryos. As with cryostorage, regulations governing the transportation of gametes and embryos vary around the globe and are most easily divided into those that determine operational aspects of shipping and those that limit transport. An example of operational legislation is seen under the United Kingdoms Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority HFEA which has clearly stated rules for importing and exporting gametes and embryos. These rules include packaging and labeling of cryoshipped specimens, restrictions on sending gametes or embryos to an unlicensed clinic, and even a requirement for written agreements if thirdparty carriers are used 41Human Fertilisation and Embryology AuthorityCode of Practice, 9th Ed. Guidance Note 15.httpsportal.hfea.gov.ukmedia152720191216codeofpractice9theditiondecember2019.pdfDate accessed September 28, 2020Google Scholar. EU transport is fairly easy among the EU countries, requiring, among specific packaging guidelines, a written confirmation of acceptance from the receiving clinic as well as documentation of infectious disease testing compliance. Gametes and embryos coming into the United States may need to meet US Food and Drug Administration tissue guidelines 42FDA Compliance Program Guidance ManualImported human cells, tissues, and cellular and tissuebased products HCTPs 7342.007 Addendum, Section III B4.httpswww.fda.govmedia73960downloadDate accessed September 30, 2020Google Scholar and are subject to United States customs inspections which has caused some problems in the past as a result of delays in processing 43U.S. Customs and Border ProtectionWhat you need to know before importing biologic material into the U.S.httpswww.cbp.govtradebasicimportexportwhatyouneedknowimportingbiologicalmaterialsunitedstatesDate accessed September 24, 2020Google Scholar. A commercial invoice describing the contents and value of cryopreserved material is also required. Importing and exporting patient specimens in and out of the United States may also trigger compliance with some of the regulations of the International Air Transport Association and the Federal Department of Transportation 44University of Pennsylvania Environmental Hea