This not only has discomforting imperialist overtones. Insofar as it universalizes what might be a specifically Western understanding of democracy, it also jars with the articles ambition to offer a general account of democratic backsliding. For these reasons, a satisfactory account of democratic backsliding would do better not to rely on a Eurocentric developmental view of history. It may be asked why we should bother dealing with vexing issues of regression or progress if we could give up the concept of democratic backsliding instead. The narrower concepts used in some of the empirical and legal literature, such as coup détat or executive aggrandizement, come with much less philosophical baggage to navigate. Arent these ultimately better alternatives? While there is nothing wrong with using these concepts to categorize the different kinds of things that may occur when democracies are under attack, it would be rash to dispense with the notion of democratic backsliding altogether. As a term that describes a regressive development in English, backsliding is indeed a synonym for regression, it captures more accurately than alternative concepts what poses the problem in the first place that coups détat or acts of executive aggrandizement are usually threatening or undoing hardfought political achievements concerning individual or collective freedoms cf. Ahlhaus Niesen, 2019 Haggard Kaufman, 2021 Schäfer Zürn, 2021. It has, in other words, distinctive advantages as a normative concept for describing what is wrong with attempts to undermine democracy. 3 TOWARDS AN ALTERNATIVE THEORY OF DEMOCRATIC BACKSLIDING Three desiderata may be derived from the above discussion. A general theoretical account of democratic backsliding must explain why particular developments constitute a degeneration of democracy rather than simply stating that they are a degeneration of democracy, which presupposes that it can identify democratic regressions without resorting to a Eurocentric developmental view of history, while resisting the temptation to overgeneralize the place and function of particular idealtypical features of democracy as models of democracyapproaches usually do. I suggest that the tradition of critical theory can provide useful theoretical resources for constructing an account of democratic backsliding that meets these demands. Both democracy and regression are themes that figure prominently in that tradition, and critical theorists have been exceptionally sensitive to the problems that plague teleological conceptions of history e.g., Allen, 2016 Habermas, 1992 Horkheimer Adorno, 1969, pp. 234237 Jaeggi, 2018 Verovšek, 2019. Nor, moreover, do critical theorists resort to freestanding normative standards that are decoupled from the perspectives of those who participate in a particular individual or collective practice. Characteristically their focus is on reconstructing and then interrogating the norms and assumptions that inhere in widely accepted practices and institutions. The most comprehensive generalizing reconstruction of the selfunderstanding on which historically known democratic constitutions and declarations of rights are necessarily based Maus, 1995, p. 839 is Jürgen Habermas Between Facts and Norms, which identifies as the backbone of any existing democracy a system of rights that are meant to secure citizens public and private autonomy Habermas, 1992, pp. 151165. This understanding of democracy can fruitfully inform the present inquiry. Habermas approach is to start with an analysis of the practice of democratic constitutionmaking. A focus on the presuppositions that participants in that practice must unavoidably make in order for the practice to make sense to them is intended to unveil that constitutional democracy fundamentally represents an enterprise of free and equal citizens who govern themselves through the medium of positive law Patberg, 2017, p. 54. This insight, Habermas 1992, p. 668 suggests, may be reformulated as a guiding question for every constitutionmaker what rights must citizens mutually grant one another if they decide to constitute themselves as a voluntary association of legal consociates and legitimately to regulate their living together by means of positive law?5 Habermas answers that question by imagining a hypothetical constitutional assembly, in which a group of founders deliberates on the preconditions of legally institutionalized selflegislation. The first conclusion the hypothetical founders arrive at is that the chosen medium of positive law requires them to grant each citizen the status of the bearer of subjective rights. This leads them to establish three categories of basic rights iiii that, taken together, constitute an association of legal consociates Patberg, 2017, p. 54. In addition, the imagined founders recognize that a category of political rights is necessary to enable citizens to become authors of the law, instead of being merely passive recipients of the law iv. Taken together, this produces the system of rights basic rights whatever their concrete content that result from the autonomous elaboration of the right to the greatest possible measure of equal individual freedom of action for each person basic rights whatever their concrete content that result from the autonomous elaboration of the status of a member in a voluntary association of legal consociates basic rights whatever their concrete content that result from the autonomous elaboration of each individuals right to equal protection under the law, that is, that result from the actionability of individual rights basic rights whatever their concrete content that emerge from the autonomous elaboration of the right to an equal opportunity to participate in political lawgiving Habermas, 2001, p. 777.6 That the substantive content of these sets of rights is not specified is deliberate. The system of rights is an abstract framework for positive democratic constitutional law that, as Ingeborg Maus puts it, is intended to leave room for the political autonomy of constitutional lawmaking and lawgiving citizens who first develop rights from their own vantage point, bring them historically to consciousness, and enact them into positive law also see Habermas, 1992, pp. 160162 Habermas, 1996, p. 90. It is thus up to the citizens of realexisting democracies or their representatives to spell out the concrete content of their basic rights, as well as establish the central institutional components that sustain their constitutional order. None of these things, the thought goes, should be determined from the observerperspective the theorist. The attractiveness of this approach lies in part in its minimalism. It does not insist on the presence of particular political institutions nor does it stipulate any substantive fundamental rights that a polity must secure if is to count as democratic. As such, the four sets of basic rights can be translated into multiple varieties of democratic constitutionalism. They are just as compatible with democracies that reign in majority rule through legal checks as with systems of collective selfrule that lack such constraints. So long as citizens rights to an equal opportunity to participate in political law giving are protected in other ways,7 Habermas system of basic rights does not even require that democracies hold elections. Clearly, then, it can satisfy desideratum 3. No particular model of democracy is implicitly assumed as normative ideal. Less straightforward is the question of whether Habermas approach can also satisfy the rather demanding desideratum 2. It is after all parasitic on a broader theory of progressive social evolution that positions Western modernity as the outcome of moralpractical learning see, most notably, Habermas, 1981. Learning processes, on this line of thinking, were set in motion by the Enlightenment and the democratic revolutions of the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In Habermas own words 2019, p. 737, these events introduced a new tension Spannungsbogen between norms and reality into social reality itself, since the rights that were framed as universal by the emerging republican constitutions were first only enjoyed by a small privileged minority. However, those who sought to criticize lacking social and political justice were now in a position to make appeals to the nonrealised normative content of nonsaturated basic rights and claims to justice Habermas, 2019, p. 737. Eventually, these appeals, and the episodes of resistance that sometimes accompanied them, encouraged the sort of collective moral learning that led to the gradual expansion and institutionalization of equal freedoms to universal suffrage, human rights, and so on. Though Habermas is careful not to frame those learning processes in strongly linear terms see Habermas, 2019, p. 737, critics like Amy Allen 2016, p. 9 have rightly worried that a certain vestigial remnant of the traditional philosophy of history remains in the notions of sociocultural development, historical learning, and moralpolitical progress that inform Habermass conception of modernity. In other words, Habermas remains committed to a core understanding of social progress, such that if a society can be said to have progressed then this will be because that society followed a certain developmental, unidirectional, and cumulative moralpolitical learning process. As far as the system of rights is concerned, the potential problem is twofold. On the one hand, being pegged to what is an avowedly Eurocentric theory of modernity, in which the motor of progress are moralpractical learning processes instigated by the Enlightenment, it may be seen as perhaps unintentionally devaluing alternative developmental paths Allen, 2016, p. 17. On the other hand, when employed as a normative standard, the system of rights is vulnerable to the criticism that it universalizes a particular European or Western experience of constitutionalism, sidelining other forms of democratic selfgovernment. Does this then disqualify Habermas account? The latter of the two issues hardly poses a problem. Even if the emergence of democratic constitutionalism may initially have been a European particularity, arguably the notion of free and equal citizens exercising selfrule through the medium of positive law also underpins nonWestern democratic constitutions, without it always or necessarily being a Western imposition see, e.g., Ackerman, 2015 Galligan Versteeg, 2013. It may well be that some societiespossibly at local or substate levelshave opted for radically different forms of organizing democracy, and it seems clear the system of rights cannot be applied to those societies. But these are rare exceptions. Recall, moreover, that the four categories of basic rights are abstract placeholder rights whose concrete content is meant to be shaped by real constitutionmakers. This also tempers the force of the objection that Habermas approach unduly universalizes a European experience of constitutionalism, for it raises the prospect of a large variety of substantive formulations of rights that are informed by nonWestern normative commitments Khaitan, 2019b. As already noted, decoupling the form of rights from their content makes space for a plurality of constitutionalism. The former issue, to do with the Eurocentrism of Habermas theory of modernity, proves more complicated. If a normatively adequate account of democratic regressions is to emerge, it seems that a step back from Habermas is requiredotherwise, it is difficult to see how desideratum 2 could be satisfied. One possibility is to retain the developmental theory of modernity and restrict the scope of application. This is what Ahlhaus and Niesen 2019 attempt in their account of selective regressions. Their suggestion is that one can fruitfully deploy an Enlightenment conception of progress to identify regressions as long as one does not universalize its reach Insofar as the discussion of regressions has an indexical reference to ones own order, it can dispel the suspicion that it has an imperial understanding of progress, as it criticizes the collective self, not the other Ahlhaus Niesen, 2019, p. 494.