This, in turn, has had farreaching consequences at the domestic level. Switzerland is, therefore, a case worth considering for scholars interested in the Europeanization of policymaking. Not surprisingly, then, there are countless contributions on the impact of EUrelated factors on Swiss politics and policy outputs for an overview see Fischer 2007. Twenty years after the popular rejection of the EEA, it is time to take stock of these contributions and to make their findings available to a wider audience. What do we know about the Europeanization of Swiss policymaking? This is the opening question of this debate. The international literature on Europeanization has demonstrated a strong preference for qualitative studies over quantitative studies Exadaktylos and Radaelli 2012b. This also holds for Switzerland. A number of smallN studies2 have provided insights into the effects on Swiss decisionmaking processes and on related power relations, conflict and coalition among domestic actors. Legal scholars, for their part, have discussed how and to which extent EU norms influence the Swiss legal order Epiney 2009. LargeN studies are scarcer, and they have mainly focused on legislation. More specifically, authors have adopted a quantitative approach to measure how much Swiss legislation is Europeanized, and to establish causal links between EU factors and domestic policies Arbia 2008, Gava and Varone 2012, Jenni 2013, Kohler 2009, Linder et al. 2009, Mallepell 1999. While Switzerland is strongly integrated in the EU, it still stands apart as a nonEU and nonEEA country. In a comparative perspective, it thus offers variation on a crucial institutional variable, namely nonmembership to these two European supranational organizations. Switzerland appears consequently as a valuable control case for crossnational inquiries that aim at identifying the effects of the EU on national political systems and outcomes Bartle 2006, Fontana et al. 2008, Haverland 2007, LeviFaur 2004. Differences in the extent of Europeanization within the country, with some policy fields strongly affected and others largely immune from EUdriven influence, further motivate the comparison of Europeanization effects across policy fields in Switzerland e.g. Papadopoulos 2008, Sciarini et al. 2004. In the EU, there is a strong preference for studying the policy effects of Europeanization, whereas there is definitely less intellectual appetite for appraising the politics dimension Exadaktylos and Radaelli 2012a 24. Switzerland tends to depart in that respect as several studies have dealt with decisionmaking processes and have focused on the related politics and, to some extent, polity dimensions.