eCollection 2024 Sep. Erythroderma Following PfizerBioNTech COVID19 Vaccination in a Patient With Atopic Dermatitis A Case Report. Handal M1, Aoki KC1, Bartos S2. Author information 1Medicine, Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Osteopathic Medicine, Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, USA. 2Dermatology, Imperial Dermatology, Hollywood, USA. Cutaneous adverse reactions to mRNA COVID19 vaccines in patients with preexisting dermatologic disease include bullous eruptions, pityriasis rubra pilaris, dermatomyositis, and granuloma annulare. Erythroderma is a rare but severe adverse reaction not previously seen. This case report describes the development of erythroderma in a 73yearold male with a history of atopic dermatitis, with widespread erythema and scaling covering 95 of his body surface area, which developed sequentially after receiving each dose of the PfizerBioNTech BNT162b2 COVID19 vaccination. The patients condition improved significantly with appropriate dermatologic treatment, including systemic and topical corticosteroids and dupilumab. Thus, it is imperative to recognize erythroderma as a potential side effect of the PfizerBioNTech COVID19 vaccine, particularly in patients with preexisting dermatologic conditions. Early diagnosis and treatment are vital for managing this potentially lifethreatening reaction and preventing severe complications. Copyright 2024, Handal et al. DOI 10.7759cureus.68936 PMCID PMC11461041 PMID 39381449 Conflict of interest statement Human subjects Consent was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following Paymentservices info All authors have declared that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other relationships All authors have declared that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.