Within the European Union, the response to the COVID19 pandemic has a striking diversity in its approach. By focusing on Belgium, France, Germany, and Italycountries that represent different models of administrative systems in Europethe analysis shows that major similarities and convergences have become apparent from a crosscountry perspective. Moreover, coping with the crisis has been first and foremost an issue of the national states, whereas the European voice has been weak. Hence, the countries immediate responses appear to be coronanationalistic, which we label coronationalism. This essay shows the extent to which the four countries adopted different crisis management strategies and which factors explain this variance, with a special focus on their institutional settings and administrative systems. During the last two decades, the globalized world has been exposed to a series of pandemics SARSCoV in 200203, global influenza in 200405, swine flu in 200910, and global influenza again in 201718 and 201920. In light of these events, national governments around the world, including those in the European Union EU, have often had opportunities to prepare for health crises, their management, and the development of governance mechanisms to deal with them. The COVID19 crisis has shown that European countries remain poorly prepared for dealing and coping with health crises and for responding in a coordinated way to a severe influenza pandemic or to any similar global, sustained, and threatening public health emergency WHO 2019, 23. Even if many countries risk analyses and pandemic plans were available and the specialized agency of the EUthe European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ECDCperiodically stressed the importance of planning, these plans have rarely been exercised in preparation for expected events. As a consequence, the knowledge gained from previous pandemics and risk scenarios has been barely, if at all, used and shared by decision makers. Most striking from an EU perspective, coping with the crisis was first and foremost an issue of the national states, whereas the collective European voice was rather weak, if not sometimes entirely absent. Hence, the countries immediate responses appear to be coronanationalistic, which we label coronationalism. Public administration has several theories and models that try to capture different realities of governments handling major crises or failures in general, such as crisis management Boin et al. 2016 Boin and Lodge 2016 Christensen et al. 2016, policy failures Peters 2015, and blame avoidance Hood 2010 Mortensen 2013. There are also several theories and models about dramatic changes in realities, such as change management Fernandez and Rainey 2006 with burning platforms Skinner 2016, disruptive and sustainable innovations Osborne and Brown 2005, or transformation governance Grin, Rotmans, and Schot 2010. This contribution compares the struggles of national governments in the first four months of 2020 to develop, establish, and use mechanisms for crisis governance as a response to cope with the COVID19 pandemic within the diverse scenery of the EU. The focus of this article is thus on what the national crisis response mechanisms in the coronavirus crisis look like and which factors influence their design and use. However, at this early stage, we do not discuss the implications of the measures taken on the basis of these crisis management mechanisms. The analysis focuses on Belgium, France, Germany, and Italy, countries that represent different models of administrative systems in Europe see Kuhlmann and Wollmann 2019. Whereas France and Italy stand for the Continental European Napoleonic model with a traditionally highly centralized administrative setting although with recent tendencies toward decentralization, Germany is a federal state with strong Länder state governments. Belgium has moved from a centralized Napoleonic country to a federal state in which subnationallevel governments, called regions, enjoy significant powers. We assume that these differences in administrative settings play a role when it comes to explaining specific modes of crisis management regarding 1 monitoring, 2 learning, 3 decisionmaking, 4 coordinating, 5 communicating, 6 leading, and 7 recovering capacity. Two main points result from our comparison To fight global crises, national responses are necessary but not sufficient. To the extent that national responses are different and divergent, more coordination is required. These differences and divergences can be explained mainly by institutional variance. This essay shows the extent to which the four countries adopted different crisis management strategies and the factors that explain this variance, with a special focus on institutional settings and administrative systems. Drawing on this crosscountry comparative perspective, we show that managing the COVID19 crisis in Europe has been predominantly shaped by distinct countryspecific approaches instead of convergent Europeanized action. Monitoring When and How to Start Defining and Solving Which Problem? The scope of the problem hit many countries by surprise, as almost nobody expected Europe to be the next epicenter of the virus outbreak, after China. The EU agency that was established to avoid and contain such a crisis, the Stockholmbased ECDC, failed to alert its EU member states. Within the EU, Italy became the first hot spot, with a second wave hitting France, Spain, and Austria and a third wave in Belgium, the Netherlands, and Germany. Central and Eastern European countries showed fewer registered cases. Highly affected nonEU countries included the United Kingdom, Norway, and Switzerland. In general, the dynamics differed and the reasons for different impacts also varied from country to country. Early warning detection systems are crucial for speedy and effective responses. This needs to be combined with reliable and comparable monitoring systems and mechanisms to translate and interpret data into information, which is made available and useful for risk analysis and decisionmaking and for feeding adjusted policy measures and service delivery. The different attention paid by countries to the updating of their pandemic preparedness plans see table 1 has probably been reflected in different attitudes toward and awareness of the threat. The different governance structures for epidemiological risk analyses and pandemic plans were also influential. Table 1. Regulatory Design for Management of Health Crises Pandemics Belgium France Germany Italy Epidemiological risk analyses pandemic plans Federal government Sciensano Scientific Institute of Public Health federal government agency National Ministry of Solidarity and Health Ministère des Solidarités et de la Santé with General Direction of Health Direction générale de la santé, DGS and CORRUSS Centre opérationnel de régulation et de réponse aux urgences sanitaires et sociales Federal Ministry of Health RobertKochInstitute National Pandemic Plan Länder and local pandemic plans Ministry of Health National Institute for Health Regional Health Care Systems Last influenza pandemic preparedness plan 2009 2011 2016 2010 Formal risk management procedures and structures No specific procedures for healthrelated crises except for general emergency procedures and structures Activation of standard operating procedures, including CORRUSS 1 and National Defense and Security Committee, beginning of January No centralized procedures available establishment of nationalregionallocal task forces amendment of the federal infection protection law to declare an epidemic emergency of national concern March 25, 2020 Activation of Civil Protection Operational Committee, end of January Source Authors compilation of information based on online references on the country cases at the end of the article. In all countries, the most important initiatives were taken only when the number of reported casesand deathsbegan to increase, and public awareness grew accordingly.