Author information 1La Source School of Nursing, HESSO University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland. 2Département Sciences infirmières, Université du Québec en Outaouais, Gatineau, QC, Canada. AIM Describe the stressors that longterm care facility LTCF residents and their family members were exposed to during the COVID19 pandemic, the resources they mobilised to cope with them, and the strategies used by professionals to support them. DESIGN A descriptive qualitative design study. METHOD Between March 2021 and February 2022, we carried out semistructured interviews with 8 LTCF residents, 11 family members, and 6 focus groups made up of healthcare and support staff from 8 LTCFs. RESULTS Three themes emerged 1 residents and family members separated and suffering, 2 residents and family members reinventing themselves, and 3 staff attempts to maintain residents wellbeing. CONCLUSION LTCF Residents and their family members exposure to the various stressors linked to the COVID19 pandemic generated suffering. Healthcare and support staff implemented strategies to support them, notably to maintain links between them. Some deep reflection must occur on the concepts of LTCF residents autonomy and selfdetermination when implementing protective measures in future pandemic situations. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PROFESSION AND PATIENT CARE This study has provided new insights into the nature of the stressors faced by LTCF residents and their families, and the measures implemented by professionals to support them. The role of the families of LTCF residents needs to be better recognised. Our results indicate the importance of involving nurses in discussions on patient autonomy and selfdetermination when implementing protective measures in a pandemic situation. IMPACT Exploring the nature of the stressors experienced by LTCF residents and their families enables professionals to tailor strategies to support them. Maintaining residents selfdetermination is essential when implementing protective measures. Families involved with residents must be recognised and included in the assessment of stressors and the personalisation and implementation of strategies to support LTCF residents. PATIENT OR PUBLIC CONTRIBUTION No Patient or Public Contribution. 2024 The Authors. Journal of Advanced Nursing published by John Wiley Sons Ltd. DOI 10.1111jan.16530 PMID 39382352