This is the socalled direct form of Europeanization. On the other hand, however, the country has also adapted unilaterally to existing EU rules. In Switzerland, this indirect form of Europeanization is also known as autonomous adaptation autonomer Nachvollzug. As a founding member of the European Free Trade Association EFTA, Switzerland concluded a Free Trade Agreement FTA on manufactured goods with the European Community EC in 1972, which became the cornerstone of the SwissEC relationship for the following fifteen years. Reacting to the EC plan to create a Single European Market based on the four EC freedoms free circulation of goods, capital, services and people, EFTA countries negotiated the EEA. While the EEA agreement offered them access to the single market, it did not grant them full codecision rights. As a result, the Swiss Government accepted the EEA agreement but applied, in parallel, for full membership to the EC. However, the popular rejection of the EEA agreement on 6 December 1992 forced the Swiss Government to revise its policy line, and to revert to bilateral sectoral negotiations with the EU Dupont and Sciarini 2001. The first round of bilateral agreements, covering seven sectors, was concluded in 1999 and ratified by Swiss citizens in 2000 Dupont and Sciarini 2007. The second round of bilateral talks resulted in nine additional agreements Afonso and Maggetti 2007.6 Although new negotiations on various topics have taken place with some having already ended since 2008, the whole process is currently on hold. Until recently, the lack of agreement on highly controversial institutional issues has been put forward as the main culprit for this situation. However, the historical adoption by Swiss citizens in February 2014 of the SVPs popular initiative against massive immigration, a direct challenge to the existing agreement on the free movement of people with the EU, has opened a new era of uncertainty. Although the direct influence arising from formal negotiations and related agreements with the EU is relatively well documented, this is less the case for indirect Europeanization. To be sure, we know that EU influence also occurs even in the absence of international negotiations, but we do not know exactly to which extent Switzerland has been affected. That is, we do not know which policy sectors have been most influenced by indirect Europeanization, and how much the country has unilaterally adapted. There are, however, good reasons to believe that the extent of autonomous adaptation is considerable. Since 1988 the Federal Council has introduced a eurocompatibility examination in the message accompanying bills submitted to the Parliament. From then on, Federal Council messages include a section that evaluates the compatibility of the new piece of legislation with European rules. In December 2002, the European clause was further institutionalized, i.e. it was incorporated in the Federal law regulating the relationship between the Executive and the Legislative.7 In that sense, all decisionmaking processes include a European perspective, regardless of whether the outcome is eurocompatible or not. In practice, the eurocompatibility of Swiss legislation is the rule and the adoption of a legislative act which is not in conformity with European Community Law is the exception for which good reasons must be given Epiney 2009 181. Given the importance granted to the Eurocompatibility of Swiss legislation, the absence of knowledge regarding the extent of indirect Europeanization is especially striking. In fact, it is not unlikely that indirect Europeanization has stronger effects than direct Europeanization. Finally, while this Debate is dedicated to Europeanization policy processes and outputs, we have to keep in mind that the EU is but one partner among others even if it is arguably the most crucial partner for a country located in the middle of Europe such as Switzerland. The point we wish to make here is that Europeanization should be put in perspective with the impact of other international arenas. The internationalization of Swiss policies does not stop at the EUs borders. It also comprehends bilateral agreements with other countries and multilateral policies coordinated by the United Nations, the World Trade Organization or the OECD. The recent international disputes regarding tax evasion and its impact on Swiss banking secrecy come evidently to mind, but international commitments naturally affect a wide array of policy fields, from environmental and health regulations to judicial procedures. In this regard, it is useful to assess Europeanization effects while keeping an eye on the more general internationalization of Swiss policies. While the first three questions deliberately focus on the policy effects of Europeanization, the last question widens the analytical perspective. We have asked the contributors to this Debate to address additional EUinduced effects What are the main effects of Europeanization with respect to politics and polity? Starting with politicsrelated effects, what does the Swiss case tell us with respect to the ongoing, lively debate on the differential empowerment associated with Europeanization Börzel and Risse 2003 i.e. regarding the changes in the balance of power between parliament and government, between executive actors and nonstate actors, and among political parties or interest groups? Similarly, do empirical records help us to take sides on the issue of whether Europeanization increases or reduces domestic conflict? Finally, what are the polity effects, if any, brought about by Europeanization and what about the mediating role of domestic institutions Haverland 2000? Although the polity dimension is the least addressed by Europeanization studies Europeanwide Exadaktylos and Radaelli 2012a, this is presumably different in Switzerland, as shown by some of the contributors to this Debate. The first contribution by Sabine Jenni relies on the eurocompatibility assessment produced by the Government when submitting a bill to Parliament 19902000. Her content analysis focuses on the impact of direct and indirect Europeanization processes and the scope of adaptation to EU law. Her contribution shows an increasing impact of direct Europeanization across time. Furthermore, indirect Europeanization takes place in policy sectors such as social insurance including employmentrelated insurance, transportation, taxation and health, and often serves as preparation for future sectoral agreements. Roy Gava and Frédéric Varone quantitatively assess the Europeanization of domestic policy changes by looking at legal reforms enacted between 1999 and 2012.