eCollection 2024. Aging mitochondria in the context of SARSCoV2 exploring interactions and implications. Delpino MV1, Quarleri J1. Author information 1Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Tecnológicas CONICET, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas en Retrovirus y Sida INBIRS, Laboratorio de Inmunopatología Viral, Universidad de Buenos Aires UBA, Buenos Aires, Argentina. The coronavirus disease 2019 COVID19, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 SARSCoV2, has presented global challenges with a diverse clinical spectrum, including severe respiratory complications and systemic effects. This review explores the intricate relationship between mitochondrial dysfunction, aging, and obesity in COVID19. Mitochondria are vital for cellular energy provision and resilience against agerelated macromolecule damage accumulation. They manage energy allocation in cells, activating adaptive responses and stress signals such as redox imbalance and innate immunity activation. As organisms age, mitochondrial function diminishes. Aging and obesity, linked to mitochondrial dysfunction, compromise the antiviral response, affecting the release of interferons, and worsening COVID19 severity. Furthermore, the development of postacute sequelae of SARSCoV2 infection PASC, also known as long COVID has been associated with altered energy metabolism, and chronic immune dysregulation derived from mitochondrial dysfunction. Understanding the interplay between mitochondria, aging, obesity, and viral infections provides insights into COVID19 pathogenesis. Targeting mitochondrial health may offer potential therapeutic strategies to mitigate severe outcomes and address longterm consequences in infected individuals. Copyright 2024 Delpino and Quarleri. DOI 10.3389fragi.2024.1442323 PMCID PMC11458564 PMID 39380657 Conflict of interest statement The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The authors declared that they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.