Referrals this includes websites at which potential buyers can explore others recommendations and opinions to form better informed purchase decisions. They bridge consumers to different retailers. Potential buyers can compare prices and reviews about different retailers and complete purchases by necessarily being directed to external websites. These social commerce websites make profits by promoting the names of retailers and indicating them as alternatives for purchasing, rather than from direct sales activities. This includes all 13 of the other websites studied. Figure 2Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Truly Social Commerce Websites22 Retrieved March, 15 2011, from httpwww.amisampath.com . It is possible to foresee another category that may not appear in the 15 websites we studied but can be found in several current social commerce websites. This category refers to aggregators of auctions and bids to accommodate collective buying initiatives, such as Groupon www.groupon.com and Living Social www.livingsocial. Basically these websites offer timed daily deals clustered by regionlocation. Functioning as mirrors of promotions and discounts, these initiatives benefit by getting a cut of the deal from the advertised retailer. Meanwhile, consumers receive andor share those deals through social networks and can benefit from the discounts if a certain number of buying transactions is achieved. In this case, the purchase of coupons or tickets is done through the website, but the product or service checkout is done directly with the retailerfirm. As none of the 15 website under investigation adopts this revenue model, further empirical research would be required for a better comprehension of this category and to develop a more complete classification for social commerce websites. It is also interesting to discover how some firms reposition themselves in the social commerce market. Emerging in 2004 as a beta version of a visual bookmarking website, Wists claims that members would benefit from having a universal shopping cart based on their wish list to be accessed from anywhere and shared with their friends. By the middle of the year 2005, they adopt the social shopping label to represent their business, which has been consistent since then. Longitudinal tracking of the 15 websites reveals that many websites e.g. Kaboodle, Reevoo, Wishpot, Osoyou and Buzzillions become available first as a beta version during the initial months or in the first years of activity with the exception that when first appearing in 2006, Stylehive is an alpha version in its logo. Such data are open for interpretation, but they apparently reflect the experimental stage of or their tentative entrance into the social commerce market. Most Common Practice Trustworthy Social Content To attest unbiased reviews seems to be a major concern of some social commerce websites, especially the referral ones. The slogan of Epinions in 2001 is Before you buy get unbiased advice, discover the best product for you, find the best place to buy it. Reevoos homepage in 2005 highlights Independent users, informed reviews the place where you can find people like yourself talking about products youre thinking of buying. Similarly, when released in 2007, Crowdstorm has the announcement on its homepage impartial buying advice from a crowd of trusted people. Using trust as a mechanism to strength members ties and credibility perceptions of usergenerated content UGC, in 2007 Buzzillions introduces the verified buyers resource to guarantee that buyers of a given product would be able to write reviews about it, which turns out to be the basis for its slogan Verified buyers. Millions of reviews. Meaningful recommendations. Promotion tags, recommendations, wish lists, ratings and reviews scores are the most adopted mechanisms for users to share content and for firms to apply UGC management as a business strategy. Tagging appears in 2005 in Wists and Etsy. Starting in 2006, tagging becomes an essential element in social commerce and is adopted by all websites under analysis. Complementary resources such as tag clouds and tag lists also start to mushroom as alternative product locators and to produce more visual search resources. According to our observation, the first website to apply tag clouds is Epinions in 2006. In 2007, tag clouds start to be widely applied in the interfaces of different social commerce websites such as Amazon, Reevoo, and ThisNext. By 2008, tag clouds become a basic and consistent feature