As a result, a total of 15 websites were included in this study Table 3. A longitudinal qualitative study requires researchers to have access to observe the same cases over time. In our study, such data would be the exact interface within the different features of a particular website at the time of observation. The Internet Archive Wayback Machine WM, httpweb.archive.org provides an ideal tool for our data collection. WM has been maintained by the Internet Archive Initiative since 1996, a nonprofit organization which curates a digital library of Internet sites. WM captures nonstatic screenshots through the lifetime of an URL since 1996 or since the URLs inception. The new version of WM has more visual features than the former and displays a calendar with the websites captures, from which the evolution can be tracked by years, months and days. Despite the fact that Wayback Machine can present some limitations of navigation within the web pages of a given website due to passwordprotected zones, robots exclusions or in conditions in dynamic sites, it is been recognized as a valuable instrument to track and investigate the evolution of websites. For example, Murphy, Hashim and OConnor 2008 conducted a research study on WM validity for data collection and for scientific arguments support purposes. They conclude that, regarding predictive, nomological and convergent validity, WM is a reliable source for tracking websites content, age and updates. They underscore that this tool is essential for researches who aim to explore the evolution of websites instead of using one point investigations, because it provides a basis for longitudinal studies in an environment that is known as extremely ephemeral and unstable. Table 3. Social Commerce Websites Analyzed In this study, for each of the 15 websites, we considered only the first and last captions per year, from the websites initial activity to the end of 2010. The strategy is to enrich the analysis, but also to preserve a standardized way for operating the data collection in circumstances where the websites did not have an equal number of captures or were not captured on the same days of a year.