Liu et al. 2005, Ye et al. 2005 and, Shen Khoury Shirmohammadi 2007 state that virtual reality VR and artificial intelligence AI help promote more realistic communication and interaction with products through more humanlike interactive interfaces, which would be a desirable feature. The literature analysis results are used to guide the empirical analysis of a set of social commerce websites, as detailed below. RESEARCH METHOD Given the novelty of social commerce and the lack of academic studies in this sphere, social commerce has been approached more in a speculative way than discussed based on empirical evidence. To overcome such gaps, this study is rooted in examining evidence in order to draw conclusions on social commerce scenarios. Specifically, we are interested in taking the technological perspective to examine the technical features and tools and to illustrate their evolution and impacts on several aspects of social commerce, such as business strategies, peoples behaviors, etc. In other words, we address these research questions what technical features and tools have been incorporated overtime in social commerce websites? What functions these features and tools have been performed to support peoples engagement and participation, and business strategies? From the four perspectives proposed by Wang Zhang forthcoming, this research focuses specially on the technological perspective. Technological features and tools represent the backbone for social interactions, content generation and information sharing. Thus, through observation of the tools incorporated in social commerce websites and by verification of their functions overtime, it is possible to infer different business strategies and practices by firms over the years. In addition, among the four perspectives, technology is the most explicit and tangible for observational purposes. This study provides systematic and repeated observations overtime to identify the progress of social commerce websites tools and technological features. Therefore, the study follows a qualitative longitudinal research design. Traditionally, longitudinal studies are applied to measure and analyze variables and predictors over time through regression analysis in quantitative research Hedeker Gibbons, 2006. Holland, Thomson Henderson 2006 emphasize the limitation of quantitative methods in Social Sciences and stress the importance of qualitative research for the examination of a process, taking its context and particularities into account. The authors believe that qualitative longitudinal research is predicated on the investigation and interpretation of change over time and process in social contexts Holland, Thomson Henderson, 2006, p.