1st edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford2019 339354Google Scholar States should consider bolstering the IHR provisions for international assistance, including incorporating a financial mechanism to assist lowincome countries in building and sustaining required capacities. To ensure accountability for national capacity building, states should integrate an effective reporting mechanism to monitor implementation of IHR obligations. Robust reporting procedures generally require states to submit periodic national reports on the measures adopted, progress made, and problems encountered in the implementation of a treaty and, crucially, to incorporate some type of independent review. Periodic reporting procedures assist states in identifying and alleviating obstacles they face when implementing commitments, without criticising their performance. International monitoring is crucial for treaty implementation in a wide range of fields and can be imagined as a key mechanism to catalyse cooperation in a postCOVID19 world. The absence of any provision for such monitoring in the IHR hampers its effectiveness and relevance. Third, the COVID19 pandemic confirms how disruptive health measures can be for trade, transport, and economic activities.11World Trade OrganizationTrade set to plunge as COVID19 pandemic upends global economy.httpswww.wto.orgenglishnews_epres20_epr855_e.htmDate 2020Date accessed June 17, 2020Google Scholar, 12World BankGlobal economic prospects. World Bank, Washington, DC2020httpswww.worldbank.orgenpublicationglobaleconomicprospectsDate accessed June 17, 2020Google Scholar, 13International Civil Aviation OrganizationEffects of novel coronavirus COVID19 on civil aviation economic impact analysis.httpswww.icao.intsustainabilityPagesEconomicImpactsofCOVID19.aspxDate 2020Date accessed June 17, 2020Google Scholar Disputes over the legality of such health measures are likely, and agreed mechanisms to settle them would prevent political tensions from becoming disruptions. Some disputes lend themselves to longer judicial processes, but many would benefit from prompt and practical mechanisms of resolution. The IHR provides a range of options, but these have never been publicly used.2WHOInternational Health Regulations, WHA 58.3.2nd edn. World Health Organization, Geneva2005Google Scholar Multilateral dispute resolution processes, including consultation forums among concerned states and an active good offices role by the WHO DirectorGeneral preceding the dispute resolution process, could provide pragmatic solutions. Fundamentally, states must tackle the overarching issue of ambiguity in the text of the regulations in any future IHR reform process. The widespread lack of clarity with respect to key state obligations in the current IHR undermines compliance by producing a zone of ambiguity within which it is difficult to say with precision what is permitted and what forbidden.14Chayes A Chayes AH The new sovereignty. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA1998Google Scholar There will soon come a time when negotiators will meet to reimagine the IHR or devise a new legal instrument to promote global cooperation to address infectious disease outbreaks and other global health threats. The challenge should be met head on, not squandered or hidden behind a veil of ambiguity so that a strengthened IHR is better equipped to respond to future global health challenges and acts as an instrument for global solidarity. ALT was a legal adviser at WHO and a consultant to WHO on global health law matters. GLB reports personal fees from WHO Regional Office for Europe for consultancy on governance and procedural questions the fees relate to a consultancy on the governance of the Office and the procedures of the Regional Committee.