87. J Clin Psychol. 2024 Oct 8. doi 10.1002jclp.23746. Online ahead of print. The influence of hope and optimism on trajectories of COVID19 stress, health anxiety, and wellbeing during the COVID19 pandemic. Long LJ1, Viana AG2, Zvolensky MJ345, Lu Q6, Gallagher MW37. Author information 1Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders, Department of Psychological Brain Sciences, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. 2School of Medicine, Texas AM University, College Station, Texas, United States of America. 3Department of Psychology, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America. 4Department of Behavioral Science, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. 5HEALTH Institute, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America. 6Department of Health Disparities Research, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. 7Texas Institute for Measurement, Evaluation, and Statistics, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America. INTRODUCTION The COVID19 pandemic posed a threat to public health and psychological functioning, with early studies documenting higher rates of psychopathology within the United States and globally. Hope and optimism promote adjustment and are associated with positive physical and mental health outcomes. Thus, individual differences in hope and optimism may also foster resilience during a global health crisis. AIMS The current study examined how hope and optimism influenced longitudinal healthfocused distress and wellbeing during the pandemic. METHODS Data were collected from 788 American adults across three periods during SpringSummer 2020 using MTurk. Latent growth curve modeling examined whether hope and optimism predicted COVID stress, health anxiety, and wellbeing trajectories. RESULTS COVID stress and health anxiety decreased after the onset of the pandemic, whereas wellbeing was stable. Individually, hope and optimism predicted lower initial COVID stress and health anxiety, along with greater initial wellbeing. When examining the combined influence of hope and optimism, optimism was more strongly related to healthfocused distress, though both were strong predictors of wellbeing. CONCLUSIONS These findings indicate that Americans were resilient and positive expectancies, particularly optimism, predicted better initial adjustment to the early phases of the pandemic. Thus, positive expectancies appear to be protective during a global health crisis.