The data obtained was coded in a spreadsheet. A semistructured checklist based on the expected and desired technological features Table 2 guided the data collection and a preliminary coding scheme, which was flexible for the inclusion of possible nonpredicted and nonlisted features and tools. Data analyses were conducted to examine data across years and across websites to gain a holistic picture of social commerce websites. FINDINGS It is important to report that the data collection misses some data for Amazon.com. WM did not capture any screenshots in years 2000 and 2001. Thus, from the expected 24 captures for 12 years 19992010, only 20 were incorporated in the study. Also, it is also important to underscore that the research did not aim to establish direct comparisons between websites or to evaluate them in terms of completeness of technological features or tools, but rather to collect, in a very exploratory way, evidences of the social commerce trails over the years and to provide a narrative of facts, with the expectation of contributing to a better understanding of this phenomenon. Any attempt at a onebyone comparison would require at least that the cases have the same target market and same period of existence, characteristics which our data collection does not present. Moreover, a retrospective analysis would not be sufficient to provide explanations about possible discrepancies without indepth knowledge of the historical circumstances of each case. Due to the extensive dataset and the purpose of the study to gain a big picture of social commerce websites as a whole the findings are presented in subsections according to the main observations. Surprise! Social Commerce Found in Late 90s Despite the fact that social commerce is officially labeled around 2005 by practitioners in trade articles Wang, 2009 and two years later in the academic literature, our findings show that social commerce is in action in the late 90s, if not earlier. Amazon and Epinions are earlier adopters of an initial referral shopping strategy In the first capture in August 1999, Amazons website shows the feature purchase circles, which has the same purpose as the currently wellknown recommendation systems and consumer communities. Wish Lists and email indications of products to friends are also offered to consumers and visitors around that time. With a different name, but with the same purpose of sharing experiences and opinions, also in 1999, Epinions offers the option of open reviews, ratings stars, gift recommendations, forums for members and what is called a community of trust. Basically, an internal social network is composed of members who are selected at consumers discretion according to their reputation in the community as good or helpful reviewers. Such evidence indicates that the dawn of social commerce initiatives had happened several years before social commerce was officially named and gained broad attention in the mid of 2000s. Ecommerce Functions Essential for Social Commerce? There seems an expectation that ecommerce functions are basic requirements for social commerce websites. Yet, out of the 15 websites, only Amazon and Etsy present functions for consumers to accomplish shopping activities after selecting productsservices with tools such as shopping cartbag, shipping options selection, payment zonesafe https, and confirmation. On the other hand, all 15 websites provide users with productservice descriptions, pricesprice comparison, pictures or videos, and the possibility that the shopping transaction may be completed in a third party external website. This discovery makes us wonder about a point that is still not explored by the literature what essentially defines a social commerce website? Presumably, the literal interpretation of the term requires commerce transaction functions, but if the buying intention is present despite the lack of purchase accomplishment at the website, then can we still consider that website as a social commerce website? The web environment makes it difficult to set the boundaries of where a consumer starts or ends a shopping activity.