Online ahead of print. Taiwan Chingguan Yihau may improve postCOVID19 respiratory complications through PI3KAKT, HIF1, and TNF signaling pathways revealed by network pharmacology analysis. Huynh DTN12, Nguyen HT3, Hsieh CM4. Author information 1College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, 11031, Taiwan. 2Can Tho University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Can Tho City, 94117, Vietnam. 3Department of Nutrition and Food Safety, Faculty of Public Health, Can Tho University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Can Tho City, 94117, Vietnam. 4College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, 11031, Taiwan. cmhsiehtmu.edu.tw. The emergence of new SARSCoV2 variants with a higher contagious capability and faster transmissible speed has imposed an incessant menace on global health and the economy. The SARSCoV2 infection might reoccur and last much longer than expected. Thence, there is a high possibility that COVID19 can cause longterm health problems. This condition needs to be investigated thoroughly, especially the postCOVID19 complications. Respiratory tract disorders are common and typical complications after recovery. Until now, there has been a lack of data on specialized therapeutic medicine for postCOVID19 complications. The clinical efficacy of NRICM101 has been demonstrated in hospitalized COVID19 patients. This herbal medicine may also be a promising therapy for postCOVID19 complications, thanks to its phytochemical constituents. The potential pharmacological mechanisms of NRICM101 in treating postCOVID19 respiratory complications were investigated using network pharmacology combined with molecular docking, and the results revealed that NRICM101 may exert a beneficial effect through the three primary pathways PI3KAKT, HIF1, and TNF signaling pathways. Flavonoids especially quercetin have a predominant role and synergize with other active compounds to produce therapeutic effectiveness. Most of the main active compounds exist in three chief herbal ingredients, including Liquorice root Glycyrrhiza glabra, Scutellaria root Scutellaria baicalensis, and Mulberry leaf Morus alba. To our knowledge, this is the first study of the NRICM101 effect on postCOVID19 respiratory complications. Our findings may provide a better understanding of the potential mechanisms of NRICM101 in treating SARSCoV2 infection and regulating the immunoinflammatory response to improve postCOVID19 respiratory complications. 2024.