Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and TechnologyVolume 48, Issue 1 p. 110 PaperFree Access Social commerce Looking back and forward Renata Gonçalves Curty, Renata Gonçalves Curty rcurtysyr.edu Syracuse University, School of Information Studies, 337 Hinds HallSearch for more papers by this authorPing Zhang, Ping Zhang pzhangsyr.edu Syracuse University, School of Information Studies, 328 Hinds HallSearch for more papers by this author Renata Gonçalves Curty, Renata Gonçalves Curty rcurtysyr.edu Syracuse University, School of Information Studies, 337 Hinds HallSearch for more papers by this authorPing Zhang, Ping Zhang pzhangsyr.edu Syracuse University, School of Information Studies, 328 Hinds HallSearch for more papers by this author First published 11 January 2012 httpsdoi.org10.1002meet.2011.14504801096Citations 95AboutSectionsPDF ToolsRequest permissionExport citationAdd to favoritesTrack citation ShareShare Give accessShare full text accessShare fulltext accessPlease review our Terms and Conditions of Use and check box below to share fulltext version of article.I have read and accept the Wiley Online Library Terms and Conditions of UseShareable LinkUse the link below to share a fulltext version of this article with your friends and colleagues. Learn more.Copy URL Share a linkShare onFacebookTwitterLinked InRedditWechat Abstract Social commerce can be briefly described as commerce activities mediated by social media. In social commerce, people do commerce or intentionally explore commerce opportunities by participating andor engaging in a collaborative online environment. As a relatively new phenomenon first widely acknowledged in 2005, social commerce presents new opportunities to examine issues related to informationcontent, business strategies, management, technologies, and peoples behavior. This article presents a qualitative longitudinal study which systematically examines technological features and tools in social commerce websites to illustrate their evolution and impacts on the formation of social commerce practice today and its potential future. Using captures crawled by the Wayback Machine, fifteen websites are analyzed from the year they were born to the year of 2010. The analyses are guided by a semistructured checklist of expected and desired tools and features based on a literature review in social commerce. The study finds that social commerce activities appeared as early as the late 90s and that there are different approaches to incorporating social channels and social networks. In addition, the findings support a preliminary classification of social commerce websites, a realignment of the terms conceptualization and the anticipation of possible new directions for this market segment. INTRODUCTION Social commerce officially appears in the literature in 2005 to refer to ecommerce new way of doing commerce. More than just a buzzword or a neologism for the combination of social media and ecommerce, it represents an emerging phenomenon stimulated by the web 2.0 wave Wang, 2009 Wang Zhang, forthcoming. Through wish lists, fora, chat rooms, locator applications geotagging, blogs, podcasts, tagging, social networks, ranking, recommendation systems, etc. social commerce enables consumers to share information, experiences and opinions about what, where and from whom to buy Jascanu, Jascanu Nicolau, 2007. In this new way of commerce mediated by social media, both consumers and firms benefit. Consumers make informed decisions based on information not only from the firms, but also from other consumers. Firms can make more profits by attracting and alluring potential buyers via positive recommendations by existing consumers. Mardsen 2010 sees social commerce as an alternative way to monetize social media by the application of a twoway strategy by helping people to connect where they usually buy or by guiding people to buy where they usually connect. Thus, this phenomenon is a rich territory in which to explore issues strongly connected to the Information Science realm, such as information behavior, information sharing, usergenerated content UGC, web 2.0, collaboration resources and platforms, web presence and crowdsourcing, to name a few. Not surprisingly, good practices in social commerce, especially the ones concerning the information perspective such as recommendations, reviews and ratings, have been expanded to other sectors of society than the retail sector. Libraries are a good example of this benchmarking where referral and user generated content have been assuming important functions for strengthening ties between community members in digital environments such as OPACs and repositories. Based on the evidence of how social commerce websites and practices are mushrooming over the years and how they contribute to the understanding of some important issues addressed by the Information Science field, this empirical study analyzes what technical features and tools have been incorporated in what ways over time in social commerce websites to support peoples engagement and participation as well as business strategies. THE SOCIAL COMMERCE LITERATURE The label social commerce is first introduced by Yahoo! in 2005, with the earliest academic article entailing it in 2007 Jascanu, Jascanu Nicolau, 2007. The starting point for the concept is believed to be based on the book The Wisdom of Crowds by James Surowieck, where he outlines the key principles and benefits of collective actions for better decisions and for what he defines as collectively intelligent solutions that are based on the principles of opinion diversity, peoples independence, decentralization and aggregation Surowieck, 2004. Social commerce is envisioned to combine both B2C Business to Consumer and C2C Consumer to Consumer approaches. Consumers can collaborate and shop in an environment similar to social networking platforms combined with one or more remotely located shopping partners Zhu, Benbasat Jiang, 2006 Leitner Grechinig, 2007a, 2007b Stephen Toubia, 2010. Both the concept and the practice of social commerce have been constantly evolving, with recent trends pointing to an even more prolific expansion to the mobile platform Wang Zhang, forthcoming. A survey conducted in the UK with 2000 respondents aged between 1865 years old reveals that 53 of consumers review items and services online Immediate Future, 2010. The same report finds that consumers reviews are considered 157 more effective than traditional advertisements, indicating the power of consumers opinions in final purchase decisions. The literature also introduces some key concepts that are frequently associated with the social commerce phenomenon, as described in Table 1. From those, Crowdsourcing, Consumer Centric Communities and User Generated Content are often applied to discuss the peoplebased aspect of social commerce. In contrast, the other three are applied more often to discuss strategies to promote appropriate virtual environments for social commerce activities, and how firms can benefit from them. Wang Zhang forthcoming introduce a framework to understand social commerce from four perspectives people, business strategies, technology, and information. The people perspective represents the individuals, consumers, communities and societies which are essential to the social aspect of social commerce. The business perspective embraces strategies, business models and opportunities for retailers and other entities that are perceived to benefit or to make profits from social commerce transactions. The technology perspective refers to the information and communication technology infrastructure and applications responsible for social commerces technological feasibility. The information perspective symbolizes the particularity of this extremely content driven environment where a considerable and rich amount of content related to business, products or services, or which is simply social in nature, is constantly produced Wang Zhang, forthcoming. Table 1. Social commerce correlated concepts Concepts Definitions References Consumer Centric Community CCC A community which allows the use of the synergistic experience of crowds, characterized by intensive communication between potential customers and stepbystep aggregation of information about products, prices and deals. Leitner Grechinig 2008a 2008b Crowdsourcing Combination of crowd and outsourcing coined by Jeff Howe in 2006 to represent the gap between professionals and amateurs, which has been diminished, and the importance of taking advantage of the talent of the public the crowd. Leitner Grechinig 2007b 2008a 2008b Multichannel Shopping A technological structure which enables consumers to purchase retail products in a consolidated fashion, using multiple channels store visits, catalog browsing, phone calls, online shopping etc.. The application of different channels to enhance users online shopping experience. Leckner Schlichter 2005 Revenue Models for Social Commerce Alternative ways to make moneyprofit and benefit from the shopping transaction. Some often applied to social commerce websites are onsitecontextual advertisement, affiliate programs directing users to thirdparty companies, membership fees and direct sales. Leitner Grechinig 2008 Kang Park 2009 Service Oriented Architecture SOA A system architecture approach which views every application or resource as a service, implementing a specific identifiable set of business functions, by combining multichannels and realtime applications. Liu, JihShyr Pinel 2005 User Generated Content UGC The collection of content comments, reviews, ratings, etc. which represents the evaluation of online shopping experiences and consumersusers opinion about brand reputation as well as the tangible product and intangible service aspects of the shopping event. Ghose Ipeirotes 2009 Leitner Grechinig 2008a 2008b Using Wang and Zhangs framework, we summarize the literature on the most common issues identified in social commerce Figure 1. Figure 1Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Issues addressed by the academic literature in social commerce. Based on the literature review, several expected and desirable technological features and tools are identified to support business strategies, people engagement and interaction, and information production and sharing in social commerce. These are classified in Table 2. Table 2. Expected and desired technological features Category Features Expected Ecommerce functions shopping cartbag, checkoutpayment, product visualization images, product price, shipping Social Channels chats, fora, groupscommunities, friends lists, users blogs, website blog, users profile, wiki platform Content to Socialize emoticons, favorites, images buyers choice, open comments, wish lists, podcastvideos, rankings, ratings, tags, tag clouds, polls Desired Social Networks Bebo, Delicious, Digg In, Facebook, Foursquare, Hi5, Myspace, Second Life, Stumble, Twitter OrganizersMgmt Tools calendars, geolocators, price comparison, RSS syndication, todo lists, shoplists, price alerts Mobile Site mobile version, mobile apps Augmented Reality 3D bar codes, avatars shopping assistants, avatars user, virtual reality tools fitting rooms, shopping visit Expected Features Because they are considered the next generation of ecommerce, social commerce websites are expected to inherit some ecommerce functions which are listed, but not exhaustively described in table 2. Social channels correspond to the endogenous spaces which are provided by websites for users to interact with each other and to establish a trust network. Also, it can be an alternative for retailers to curating their own consumer data warehouse and can allow them to preserve an internal shopping environment, without directly involving third parties. User Generated Contents produced by social commerce websites are considered a critical element in social commerce. Desired Features Social Networks represent the external social structures with which websites can bridge connections and enhance consumers shopping experiences. It assumes a broad meaning which includes virtual communities and bookmarksharing services within communities or by groups members. Also, this is a desired element to achieve social media monetization strategies Mardsen 2010. It might be argued that this is also an expected feature however, that classification assumes that an internal social channel would be sufficient to build the collective tiesnodes for a social shopping activity. OrganizersManagement Tools are desired elements to enhance a shopping experience. They can help consumers plan their research and buying activities, be alert to sales and best deals, and receive updated information according to their interests and profiles. The sophistication and pricing reduction of mobile devicestechnologies smartphones and personal digital assistants PDAs promote a revolution in web access behavior. The pocketsize computing is been a strong competitor of the desktop generation. Thus, this popularization is an important indicator for social websites to be aware of and, to facilitate the shopping experience, to provide appropriate web interfaces and applications for. Augmented reality functions blend the real world and computer generated datacontent. Liu et al.