2005, Ye et al. 2005 and, Shen Khoury Shirmohammadi 2007 state that virtual reality VR and artificial intelligence AI help promote more realistic communication and interaction with products through more humanlike interactive interfaces, which would be a desirable feature. The literature analysis results are used to guide the empirical analysis of a set of social commerce websites, as detailed below. RESEARCH METHOD Given the novelty of social commerce and the lack of academic studies in this sphere, social commerce has been approached more in a speculative way than discussed based on empirical evidence. To overcome such gaps, this study is rooted in examining evidence in order to draw conclusions on social commerce scenarios. Specifically, we are interested in taking the technological perspective to examine the technical features and tools and to illustrate their evolution and impacts on several aspects of social commerce, such as business strategies, peoples behaviors, etc. In other words, we address these research questions what technical features and tools have been incorporated overtime in social commerce websites? What functions these features and tools have been performed to support peoples engagement and participation, and business strategies? From the four perspectives proposed by Wang Zhang forthcoming, this research focuses specially on the technological perspective. Technological features and tools represent the backbone for social interactions, content generation and information sharing. Thus, through observation of the tools incorporated in social commerce websites and by verification of their functions overtime, it is possible to infer different business strategies and practices by firms over the years. In addition, among the four perspectives, technology is the most explicit and tangible for observational purposes. This study provides systematic and repeated observations overtime to identify the progress of social commerce websites tools and technological features. Therefore, the study follows a qualitative longitudinal research design. Traditionally, longitudinal studies are applied to measure and analyze variables and predictors over time through regression analysis in quantitative research Hedeker Gibbons, 2006. Holland, Thomson Henderson 2006 emphasize the limitation of quantitative methods in Social Sciences and stress the importance of qualitative research for the examination of a process, taking its context and particularities into account. The authors believe that qualitative longitudinal research is predicated on the investigation and interpretation of change over time and process in social contexts Holland, Thomson Henderson, 2006, p. 1. Because the universe of social commerce websites is somewhat incommensurable and a plethora of new websites is added to the World Wide Web every day, the selection of relevant cases for examination is challenging. To avoid bias or an arbitrary selection, we selected websites according to the most recent list of top social commerce websites, published in 2008, by the renowned blog Social Media Trader11 httpwww.socialmediatrader.com , which compiled the monthly traffic data from three different sources Compete, Quantcast and MSN Adlabs. The original list contained 17 websites, among which Zebo www.zebo.com is no longer in activity and Glimpse www.glimpse.com is not accessible. As a result, a total of 15 websites were included in this study Table 3. A longitudinal qualitative study requires researchers to have access to observe the same cases over time. In our study, such data would be the exact interface within the different features of a particular website at the time of observation. The Internet Archive Wayback Machine WM, httpweb.archive.org provides an ideal tool for our data collection. WM has been maintained by the Internet Archive Initiative since 1996, a nonprofit organization which curates a digital library of Internet sites. WM captures nonstatic screenshots through the lifetime of an URL since 1996 or since the URLs inception. The new version of WM has more visual features than the former and displays a calendar with the websites captures, from which the evolution can be tracked by years, months and days. Despite the fact that Wayback Machine can present some limitations of navigation within the web pages of a given website due to passwordprotected zones, robots exclusions or in conditions in dynamic sites, it is been recognized as a valuable instrument to track and investigate the evolution of websites. For example, Murphy, Hashim and OConnor 2008 conducted a research study on WM validity for data collection and for scientific arguments support purposes. They conclude that, regarding predictive, nomological and convergent validity, WM is a reliable source for tracking websites content, age and updates. They underscore that this tool is essential for researches who aim to explore the evolution of websites instead of using one point investigations, because it provides a basis for longitudinal studies in an environment that is known as extremely ephemeral and unstable. Table 3. Social Commerce Websites Analyzed In this study, for each of the 15 websites, we considered only the first and last captions per year, from the websites initial activity to the end of 2010. The strategy is to enrich the analysis, but also to preserve a standardized way for operating the data collection in circumstances where the websites did not have an equal number of captures or were not captured on the same days of a year. Each capture was then explored and navigated whenever possible to gain more details. The data obtained was coded in a spreadsheet. A semistructured checklist based on the expected and desired technological features Table 2 guided the data collection and a preliminary coding scheme, which was flexible for the inclusion of possible nonpredicted and nonlisted features and tools. Data analyses were conducted to examine data across years and across websites to gain a holistic picture of social commerce websites. FINDINGS It is important to report that the data collection misses some data for Amazon.com. WM did not capture any screenshots in years 2000 and 2001. Thus, from the expected 24 captures for 12 years 19992010, only 20 were incorporated in the study. Also, it is also important to underscore that the research did not aim to establish direct comparisons between websites or to evaluate them in terms of completeness of technological features or tools, but rather to collect, in a very exploratory way, evidences of the social commerce trails over the years and to provide a narrative of facts, with the expectation of contributing to a better understanding of this phenomenon. Any attempt at a onebyone comparison would require at least that the cases have the same target market and same period of existence, characteristics which our data collection does not present. Moreover, a retrospective analysis would not be sufficient to provide explanations about possible discrepancies without indepth knowledge of the historical circumstances of each case. Due to the extensive dataset and the purpose of the study to gain a big picture of social commerce websites as a whole the findings are presented in subsections according to the main observations. Surprise! Social Commerce Found in Late 90s Despite the fact that social commerce is officially labeled around 2005 by practitioners in trade articles Wang, 2009 and two years later in the academic literature, our findings show that social commerce is in action in the late 90s, if not earlier. Amazon and Epinions are earlier adopters of an initial referral shopping strategy In the first capture in August 1999, Amazons website shows the feature purchase circles, which has the same purpose as the currently wellknown recommendation systems and consumer communities. Wish Lists and email indications of products to friends are also offered to consumers and visitors around that time. With a different name, but with the same purpose of sharing experiences and opinions, also in 1999, Epinions offers the option of open reviews, ratings stars, gift recommendations, forums for members and what is called a community of trust. Basically, an internal social network is composed of members who are selected at consumers discretion according to their reputation in the community as good or helpful reviewers. Such evidence indicates that the dawn of social commerce initiatives had happened several years before social commerce was officially named and gained broad attention in the mid of 2000s. Ecommerce Functions Essential for Social Commerce? There seems an expectation that ecommerce functions are basic requirements for social commerce websites. Yet, out of the 15 websites, only Amazon and Etsy present functions for consumers to accomplish shopping activities after selecting productsservices with tools such as shopping cartbag, shipping options selection, payment zonesafe https, and confirmation. On the other hand, all 15 websites provide users with productservice descriptions, pricesprice comparison, pictures or videos, and the possibility that the shopping transaction may be completed in a third party external website. This discovery makes us wonder about a point that is still not explored by the literature what essentially defines a social commerce website? Presumably, the literal interpretation of the term requires commerce transaction functions, but if the buying intention is present despite the lack of purchase accomplishment at the website, then can we still consider that website as a social commerce website? The web environment makes it difficult to set the boundaries of where a consumer starts or ends a shopping activity. Furthermore, not all consumers access online stores with the final purpose of buying online. Some might use those spaces essentially for collecting impressions and opinions which can support their decisions about a selected product which will be purchased in another online or brick and mortar site. In this sense, the literature analyzes and the empirical study discloses a broader view of the concept. Collectively, social commerce can be understood as the activities by which people shop or intentionally explore shopping opportunities by participating andor engaging in a collaborative online environment. There is clearly a lack of consensus on what is defined as a social commerce website. For example, Amarasinghe 2010 presents an idea of a true social commerce website, where the social commerce business model is a result of the intersection of an ecommerce firm and social network websites in order to avoid scalability and revenue models traps Figure 2. Nonetheless, even the author questions whether some examples really fit the true business model. Based on the analysis of the 15 websites, we establish a preliminary categorization for social commerce websites direct sales and referrals. Direct sales this category includes those social commerce websites that count on an internal fulltransaction platform for commercialization, such as Amazon and Etsy, from which, if desired, consumers can complete the full purchase cycle without being directed to third parties. Amazon is an example of B2C blending internal socialization between consumers, whereas Etsy follows a C2C approach through a community centered market place composed by artists and collectors who buy and sell on the website. Referrals this includes websites at which potential buyers can explore others recommendations and opinions to form better informed purchase decisions.