In adjudicating, ICs also perform further tasks. States have established many ICs in the belief that such judicial dispute resolution will promote broader, longerterm mesolevel taskseven avoiding war.23 States have created regional human rights courts to promote and protect human rights.24 The International Criminal Court ICC and other criminal tribunals were set up inter alia to deter atrocities and to end impunity for international crimes.25 The WTO AB and investment tribunals were meant to encourage international trade and direct investment.26 ICs would be better positioned and provide a steadier will for states. ICs can also provide legitimation, when they review an actor, to assure third parties that it is trustworthy.27 States use the prospect of future impartial adjudication by ICs to send costly signals to their own citizens, other states, investors, or trading partners.28 An IC can also help a government reduce the risk that its successors will violate a treaty, tying their hands beyond what domestic constitutions can do.29 This has led some states to ratify the European Convention on Human Rights ECHR,30 and is arguably one of several tasks of the WTO,31 the arbitration panels under international investment agreements,32 and the ICC.33 ICs are better positioned than states themselves to provide such assurance. ICs may also promote general rule following and induce enforcement by reducing the likelihood of free riding. They can secure collective action over some set of policies among a set of states,34 both by shifting incentives and by assuring contingent compliers who will comply only if others do so. ICs can fulfil these tasks even without sanctions, when they settle disputes about compliance and provide public information about norm violations.35 This may trigger thirdparty sanctions and other outcasting reactions,36 such as when the WTO AB authorizes the winning state to impose otherwise prohibited tariffs on the loser.37 These tasks require public knowledge that the state will regard the ICs judgments as authoritative, displacing some of the states own reasons for action. Many ICs also perform macrolevel tasks through their judicial interpretation and adjudication. States do not always foresee the need for tasks carried out by ICs, such as harmonizing different treaties by systematic interpretation, judicializing international relations, or strengthening the international rule of law and constitutionalizing parts of it. ICs also delineate the scope of states sovereignty when they interpret international law. Whether ICs are effective in such tasks and whether these objectives are laudable is contested,38 but in the heat of treaty negotiations they are arguably better placed than states with less systemic perspectives. To assess ICs performance of such tasks, and hence their legitimacy, we must consider that they interact in complex interdependence with other actors, and recognize that each IC may perform several of these tasks simultaneously, and for various constituencies. This clutters the landscape, helps explain the bewildering range of criticisms, and hinders any overall assessment of legitimacy. This brief overview illustrates that the various tasks of ICs often rely on their core role of impartial dispute resolution by the use of legal methods and sources. This sets them apart from other ways to address disputes or coordinate and stabilize expectations, such as bargaining, war, casebycase mediation based on discretion or considerations of equity or fairness,39 good offices, or conciliation. Standards of legality and ruleoflaw values seem necessary for ICs to carry out their core task,40 yet may sometimes stand in tension with the other tasks.41 The role of any IC is limited its effects arise in interaction with other actors who are more or less willing and able to defer to its judgments and interpretations. The tasks of the IC are to enable states, not to coerce them.