The methods usedwhich included, among others, an extensive internet and literature search to identify relevant institutionswere suboptimal and the conclusions too optimistic. Moreover, the study itself seemed somewhat flawed as the process concentrated on gathering information from public funding research agencies and learned societies. Because there is a consensus that research institutions are the main guarantors of integrity, it was surprising that universities, research institutions and private funding agencies, such as the Wellcome Trust in the UK, were excluded. Although the report stated that the countries surveyed used a wide range of approaches to deal with integrity, there was no discussion of the variability of standards and no mention of the number of investigations submitted to existing panels. Nevertheless, the ESF report sets out guidelines for research integrity and contains useful information about the recent efforts of various countries to promote integrity guidelines. In 2004, the Slovak Research and Development Agency pragmatically adopted the rigorous recommendations of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG Bonn, Germany for safeguarding good scientific practice. Interestingly, in Croatia, it is mainly due to efforts of the editorial board of the Croatian Medical Journal that, in 2006, following the reform of the higher education legislation, a National Committee for Ethics in Science and Higher Education CESHE was established to investigate allegations of misconduct brought to its attention ESF, 2008. But what is the extent of scientific misconduct in Europe? At first glance, it might seem that it occurs more frequently in northern Europe and is virtually absent in southern countries Bosch 2007, 2008, although this impression might simply reflect a lack of reporting and monitoring in Mediterranean countries. In Spain, for example, most research institutions have no codes of scientific integrity and no policies to handle misconduct. By contrast, UK universities do have specific procedures, even though they are rarely used Farthing, 2004. Some have suggested that most European countries tend to conceal individual cases of fraud owing to a lack of precise rules Coker McKee, 2001, but the actual situation might well be polarized in countries with no tradition of monitoring scientific integrity, research misconduct might be far more common than in those with established standards. The historian Horace F. Judson asserted that fraud is intrinsic in cultures that are characterized by secrecy, privilege, and lack of accountability Judson, 2004. These features are indeed prevalent in some European research organizations that lack transparency Bosch, 2002 Anonymous, 1998 Gui et al, 2002 it has been noted that Russia maintains a tolerant attitude to violations of ethical principles and falsification in research Vlasov, 2002. In Poland, a highprofile case of mass plagiarism led to the proposal of national, independent committees for scientific misconduct, with the power to initiate and conduct investigations Wronski, 1998 Zawadzki Abbasi, 1998 yet it has been reported that Polish scientists might be protected from accusation or prosecution Rivoire, 2003. The fact remains that the real extent of misconduct in Europe is still unknown, inadequately investigated and possibly concealed. In what follows, I present a brief account of how different nations have tried to deal with the problem. The fact remains that the real extent of misconduct in Europe is still unknown, inadequately investigated and possibly concealed The Scandinavian countries were the first in Europe to draw up regulations to address scientific misconduct Riis, 1999 Farthing, 2004 ORI, 1999. These regulations, which were drafted in the early 1990s, include guidelines for good scientific practice and the promotion of scientific integrity, definitions of dishonesty, and procedures and bodies to prevent, detect, investigate and punish misconduct when it occurs Nylenna et al, 1999. Moreover, the education of scientists in good research practice has become mandatory for PhD students and senior scientists Riis, 1999. In addition, regulations protect whistleblowers from unfair victimization Ankier, 2002. Denmark has a centralized monitoring system based at the Ministry of Science, its Committee on Scientific Dishonestythe members of which are qualified in scientific and legal mattersis directly responsible for investigating misconduct allegations that involve both publicly and privately sponsored research. In 1997, the Committee set up three subcommittees to deal specifically with problems in the medical sciences natural, agricultural and veterinary sciences and social sciences and humanities. Cases can be brought to the attention of the committees by whistleblowers, institutions or the Committee itself, and to ensure harmonization, all three subcommittees have a joint chairperson, who is also a High Court judge. In one of five instances of alleged misconduct that were considered by the medical science subcommittee in 2004, the researcher against whom a complaint had been brought was found to have acted dishonestly. Norway has adopted the Danish model of independent national bodies, whereas Swedens system is a mixture of decentralized and centralized bodies Riis, 1999 Nylenna et al, 1999. In Finland, the system is fully decentralized the guidelines produced in 1994 by the countrys National Research Ethics Council state that universities and research institutions are responsible for preventing all forms of scientific misconduct and for investigating allegations Nylenna et al, 1999. As such, a suspicion of misconduct is first reported to the rector of the university or the director of the research institute. Estimates from the Scandinavian countries indicate that the prevalence of misconduct is 12 cases per million inhabitants, of which only 1 in 5 are serious casesmainly fabrication, falsification and plagiarism Riis, 1999. In the UK, the Medical Research Council was the first institution to publish rules for correct conduct in research, according to which, allegations are to be handled by the individual institutions involved Ankier, 2002. Significant changes are expected after the recent establishment of the UK Panel for Research Integrity in Health and Biomedical Sciences Cole, 2006, which aims to offer advice and support to staff and employers in the National Health Service and at universities. The Committee on Publication Ethicsa group of medical journal editors who represent 346 journalshad an important role in applying pressure to the British government to put scientific misconduct on the national agenda and to create the Panel COPE, 2005, which now offers a training programme, has a public information agenda and hears complaints from whistleblowers. However, the Panel is not responsible for investigating allegations.