In a centralized approach, a national or regional ombudsperson might exist not to investigate allegations, but to mitigate the isolation experienced by whistleblowers. Such an ombudsperson, preferably someone with an MD or PhD degree and expertise in the responsible conduct of research, would have no more than advisory authority but could still provide useful advice. Ombudspeople should also be able to advise those who believe they have been falsely accused of misconduct. In a decentralized scheme, local ombudspeople should also be available to anybody seeking advice on questions of scientific misconduct. As happens at the DFG, they would receive allegations but undertake no investigation, handing over any recommendation to an institutionindependent mediator. Another aspect that might be common to both systems is the publication of an annual report detailing the main findings of the monitoring body. Decisions on whether or not to disclose the names of scientists proven to have committed misconduct should take into account the prevailing culture and sensitivities. Additionally, to enforce implementation, research funding agencies and private foundations should make grant decisions contingent on the willingness of institutions to adhere to scientific integrity guidelines ESF, 2000. Recently, Titus et al 2008 recommended six strategies for fostering research integrity, reflecting the efforts of the ORI since its creation. Lamentably, most ORI recommendations such as adopt zero tolerance, protect whistleblowers and train the mentors are still lacking in many European nations Bosch Titus, 2009. Countries without a tradition of reporting misconduct or formal systems for investigating allegations have the opportunity to observe existing models and choose the best one to adopt. The scheme they ultimately chooseand its implementationshould be decided by consensus between all participants the scientists, research institutions, funding agencies and governments. Lamentably, most ORI recommendations such as adopt zero tolerance, protect whistleblowers and train the mentors are still lacking in many European nations The existing legislation should also be analysed. European countries have different judicial traditions that, in most cases, are not adapted to deal with cases of scientific misconduct.