Online ahead of print. Correlation of patient symptoms with SARSCoV2 Omicron variant viral loads in nasopharyngeal and saliva samples and their influence on the performance of rapid antigen testing. Shiraishi K1, Chong Y2, Goto T1, Ishimaru T3, Shimono N4, Ikematsu H5, Akashi K1. Author information 1Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Kyushu University Graduate School of Medical Sciences The First Department of Internal Medicine, Fukuoka, Japan. 2Department of Clinical Immunology, Rheumatology, and Infectious Disease, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. 3Department of Infectious diseases, Japanese Red Cross Fukuoka Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. 4Center for the Study of Global Infection, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. 5Ricerca Clinica Co., Fukuoka, Japan. Evaluating SARSCoV2 viral loads in nasopharyngeal NP and saliva samples, factors affecting viral loads, and the performance of rapid antigen testing RAT have not been comprehensively conducted during SARSCoV2 Omicron epidemic. This prospective study included outpatients enrolled during Omicron variant period in Japan. Paired NP swab and saliva samples were collected to measure viral loads by reverse transcriptionquantitative polymerase chain reaction RTqPCR. The correlation between viral loads and clinical symptoms was examined. The performance of an immunochromatographybased RAT kit was also assessed. A total of 153 patients tested within 3 days of symptom onset were included. The mean viral load was 5.60 log10 copiestest and 3.65 log10 copiestest in NP and saliva samples, respectively, resulting in a significant difference P 0.0001. Fever over 37C axillary temperature and total number of symptoms other than fever were identified as independent factors positively correlated with the viral loads in both NP and saliva samples. RAT sensitivity using NP and saliva samples was 92 and 68, respectively, using positive RTqPCR results as the reference. The sensitivity of RAT using NP and saliva samples was significantly higher in patients with fever 37C andor at least one symptom than in those with fever 37C andor no symptoms 97 vs 83 in NP swabs 80 vs 50 in saliva. Distinct symptoms, including fever 37C, may reflect high Omicron variant viral loads. Rapid antigen testing, not only using nasopharyngeal swabs but also using saliva, would be useful for COVID19 diagnosis as pointofcare testing, particularly for symptomatic patients. IMPORTANCE We examined nasopharyngeal and salivary viral loads using samples collected from outpatients with SARSCoV2 infection during the Omicron epidemic in Japan and explored the outpatient factors correlated with viral loads. In addition, we evaluated the performance of an authorized rapid antigen testing RAT kit using nasopharyngeal and saliva samples with RTPCR testing as the reference. Intriguingly, a correlation between fever and other symptoms and SARSCoV2 viral loads in nasopharyngeal and saliva samples was observed based on one COVID19 outpatient visit. RAT sensitivity was influenced by viral loads. Nevertheless, nasopharyngeal RAT is considered useful for SARSCoV2 pointofcare diagnosis. In patients with distinct symptoms, including highgrade fever, salivary RAT could be a practical diagnostic tool because of the higher estimated viral loads. After the Omicron epidemic, outpatients with mild COVID19 have become the main focus of diagnosis and treatment. Our study provides valuable information regarding the pointofcare diagnosis of these patients. DOI 10.1128spectrum.0093224 PMID 39382283