At the same time, science is becoming a truly global enterprise owing to the increased ease of international collaboration and communication between research groups and the global mobility of scientists themselves. The globalization of science and its growing economic importance underlines the need to establish and harmonize codes of good scientific practice and to regulate procedures for handling allegations of research misconduct. At the moment, however, it is the case that countriesand even different institutions in the same countryapply different standards and procedures to securing research integrity. The globalization of science and its growing economic importance underlines the need to establish and harmonize codes of good scientific practice This fragmented landscape of quality control is dissatisfying for all parties the public, academic institutions and scientists themselves. In this regard, the USA has had a 20year head start responding to widely publicized cases of research misconductnamely fraud, falsification and plagiarismUS Congress created the Office of Scientific Integrity in 1989now the Office of Research Integrity ORI Rockville, MD, USAto handle allegations of scientific misconduct in research that is funded by the Department of Health and Human Services, which includes the National Institutes of Health. The US procedures stipulate that the ORI must assess investigative reports submitted by institutions and, through an oversight role, decide whether or not misconduct has occurred www.ori.hhs.gov. In addition, scientific fraud and falsification in publicly funded research are taken more seriously in the USA they are considered as misappropriation of federal funds, with fitting legal sanctions. Indeed, several US scientists who committed fraud and falsification were eventually sentenced to stiff fines and even jail terms www.ori.hhs.govmisconductcases. There is, of course, also a long history of allegations of scientific misconduct in Europe Sidebar A, but recent cases have given a sense of urgency to the problem and have highlighted the limitations of the current research oversight system in the EU. For example, in 2003 a commission set up by the University of Constance in Germany found that Jan Hendrick Schöna physicist dismissed from Bell Labs for fraud and falsification of datahad already manipulated data in his 1997 doctoral thesis Durrani, 2003. The university stripped him of the degree under a rule that allows it to punish graduates who behave in an undignified fashion Anonymous, 2004. One might wonder what would have happened had the university had a mechanism to address allegations about Schöns dissertation before the notoriety generated by his fraud at Bell Labs. Sidebar A Allegations of early scientific misconduct in Europe Several renowned European scientists have been suspected of misconduct, demonstrating that fraud can occur at even the highest levels. Research into Louis Pasteurs notebooks revealed notable discrepancies between his laboratory records and his publications and public claims concerning the anthrax and rabies vaccines. This is especially relevant because, at one time, Pasteur held onetenth of the grants provided by the French government Altman, 1995 Anderson, 1993. Similarly, two years after Gregor Mendels 1866 landmark paper on plant hybridization was rediscovered, it was suggested that the phenotypic ratios of homozygous and heterozygous offspring reported by the Austrian founder of genetics were too good to be true Montgomerie Birkhead, 2005. Even Sir Isaac Newton reportedly used what a biographer called a fudge factor apparently, Newton organized his equations in such a way that the results turned out as required Kreutzberg, 2004. Lastly, Sigmund Freud was so confident of his first theories that he publicly boasted of therapeutic successes that did not materialize, forcing him to revise his theories while failing to admit that he had faked case histories Israëls, 2003. Early in 2006, the oral cancer research community was stunned when the Norwegian oncologist Jon Sudbø was reported to have fabricated data in an article that was subsequently retracted by The Lancet Horton, 2006. After questions about this paper were raised, The New England Journal of Medicine expressed concerns about, and ultimately retracted, two studies by the same author. An independent investigation of Sudbøs entire scientific output, starting with his 1993 PhD thesis, concluded that the bulk of his publications were invalid owing to fabrication and manipulation of raw data. The examples above illustrate one of the main problems of undetected misconduct when cases are finally uncovered, the repercussions can touch both past knowledge and future avenues of research as well as damage the careers of those only loosely associated with the fraudulent scientist. The European Commission EC has yet to draw up any regulations or make recommendations to address potential problems of misconduct within its framework research programme Riis, 1999 Hagmann, 1999. However, other organizations have begun to pay attention. In 2000, the European Science Foundation ESF Strasbourg, France published a policy paper to support a move towards a transcontinental approach to monitoring research ESF, 2000. The ESFan association of 78 scientific research organizations in 36 European countriesrecommended that national bodies should initiate discussions on the most appropriate national approach to procedures for investigating allegations of scientific misconduct , whether by means of an independent national body , formal procedures in each university and research institution, or by other means ESF, 2000. It also urged its affiliated funding agencies to consider ways of making an institutions eligibility for research grants conditional on the institution having adequate policies for good scientific practice and procedures for investigating allegations of scientific misconduct. Another ESF report, published in May 2008 and commissioned for the First World Conference on Research Integrity in Lisbon, Portugal, intended to provide a systematic review of various approaches to promote research integrity and handle allegations of research misconduct ESF, 2008. However, the report missed the opportunity to rigorously follow up the situation seven years later.